---
layout: default
template: 0.4
type: location
nav_exclude: true
has_children: true
has_toc: false

parent: Directory
title: Diocesi Of Montfroid
role: Region
status: 

images: 
- ../../imgs/gallery/Pasted%20image%2020250414191840.png

---

{% include header_directories.md %}
{% comment %}
`=map(this.images, (x) => "![im|200](" + x + ")")`

Hemmed in by the sea to the west and cursed woods to the east, only the thin lines of sea trade and the occasional brave traveller from the south connect it with the greater nation.

Lord Eveque-Abat Berengar of the monastery of Sent Miquel, whose secular rule is enforced by his noble seneschal, the Videm Odo of Castelnou.
A handful of other villages are scattered around the diocese.
Greater nobles are not to be found.

Life is hard in Montfroid, with the wilderness filled with the wreckage of past ages and the hungry bronze spears of vicious Gobelins.
To the east, the pagans of the Perdut come over the hills to plunder luckless travellers or ill-guarded villages in service to their devilish gods.
And all the while, the dreadful lords of the Fae plot their dark purposes in the east, sending their heathen servants and Gobelin slaves to do evil to the faithful folk.

There are many forsaken Deeps in the wilds of Montfroid, whether fallen monasteries, abandoned
towns, or lost delvings from a prior age.
The common folk of Montfroid are brave, for cowards cannot live in a land like theirs.

So it is that novice adventurers are not an uncommon sight on the wharves of Castelnou.
Fresh from foreign ships or raised up from local villages, these brave young men and women dare the wilds of Montfroid to bring back gold and glory for the sake of a finer future.
Alas, far more go out than ever come in again, but such is the price they must dare to
pay for the hope they wish to nurture.


## Montfroid Society

### The People

Montfroiders generally have blond or red hair, light eyes, and pale skin, though
some lineages are known for their long black locks and dark eyes. 
Constitutionally inclined towards sentimentality, passion, and a romantic outlook on life.
For most, this shows only in a tendency for hot emotion and ready feeling.
Some, however, fall so utterly into a particularly dramatic situation.

### The Language

Montfroiders still speak in the old "Court Riu" tongue now found only in southern noble courts and ancient chansons.
Fortunately, the language is not so different from the imperial language.

### The Rulers

Montfroid is a diocesi, a fief ruled by an eveque-abat of the [Church of
the Weeping Mother](../weepingMother/index.md) and administered by a noble videm as his secular regent.
The current ruler is Eveque-Abat Berengar, who dwells in the
monastery of Sent Miquel in Castelnou.
His videm is Odo, of the noble Bezier family, who is responsible for all the ordinary affairs of the diocesi and directly rules the town of Castelnou.

Each village has its own noble ruler, whether a videm family, an
enfeoffed baronial lord, or in the case of the village of La Parra, a
knightly holding recognized for past deeds of arms. All such holdings
are hereditary, passing first to the lord's martially-qualified sons in
order of age, then to one of his daughters, and otherwise to his
brother. Clergy are not permitted to inherit a title, and the Church is
a common refuge for excess noble scions or those found unfit to rule.

No lord in Montfroid is very distant from their subjects, as Castelnou
is the only settlement in the diocesi with more than a thousand
inhabitants. Nobles are common sights in public, usually with a
household retainer or two for dignity's sake, and respectable commoners
think nothing of sharing a few deferential words with them. Adventurers
are less than respectable but even they can often get a direct audience
after they do something useful for a village's people.

Every male ruler in Montfroid is expected to be a capable warrior, and
no heir can hope to follow his father without having a few successful
battles against gobelins or pagan raiders under his belt. Those who
prove cowards or feeble are sent to the monasteries to clear the way for
more suitable heirs. Female nobles are not expected to show such
prowess, provided they pick a husband fit to lead their militia to war.
As such, the suitable marriage pool for aspiring baronesses is sometimes
thinner than they would prefer.

While female gentry are not expected to be blooded warriors like their
brothers, the nobility consider it a scandal if they are not taught at
least the rudiments of combat. The dangers of Couront do not respect
rank, and a young noblewoman who cannot use a knife or draw a bow will
not be excused from them by her ignorance. The nobility usually enlist
one of the trained monastic sisters of the Order of the Crimson Rose to
teach their daughters both religion and violence, but poorer families
sometimes have to leave the job to fathers and brothers.

Archery is the traditional martial art of noblewomen in Montfroid, and
the commoner women who can afford to emulate them share the pastime.
While a woman is seldom -- but not never -- seen breaking lances at a
tournament, the archery lists are always well-populated with noblewomen
and ambitious commoners, and it is not uncommon for the prize to be
carried off by fair hands. Several famous romances have begun over a
shared shooting line, and even the less keen-eyed daughters of the
nobility still sigh wistfully over the thought of trading shots with
some handsome young scion on a bright tournament day.

Morality and Values

Montfroiders are a mix of back-country roughness and exquisite romantic
sensibility. The one-eyed charcoal burner with fewer teeth than fingers
might end his day of bitter toil by trading chansons around the fire
with his fellows, and a bandit chieftain who burns a granary for a
distraction might burst into penitent tears at a victim's reproving
verse. Whether peasant or noble, they all share certain values.

[Piety]{.Bold-Italic ._idGenCharOverride-2}: Montfroiders are absolutely
convinced that only the grace of the Bleeding God can save them from
absolute destruction. His power is self-evident and only a fool or a
foreigner could possibly deny it. Montfroiders may argue over His will,
but never over His authority.

[Tradition]{.Bold-Italic ._idGenCharOverride-2}: The customs, habits,
and ways of their ancestors have kept them alive for centuries, and
abandoning these ways is done at grave risk. Individuals may gamble with
it, but communities seldom dare leave the proven path. There are stories
enough of what can befall those who are too clever with their
innovations.

[Tales]{.Bold-Italic ._idGenCharOverride-2}: For the Courontines, every
life is a tale and it is a person's responsibility to make it a good
one. The chansons and stories of old are patterns to live by, models of
heroism, virtue, cleverness, and occasional folly by which men and women
measure themselves. Even wicked deeds and failures may perhaps be
excused if they make a good story. As such, Montfroiders sometimes end
up doing things that are more narratively appropriate than strictly
logical.

[Strength]{.Bold-Italic ._idGenCharOverride-2}: Montfroid kills both the
weak and those who are foolish enough to rely upon them. A true
Montfroider seeks to be strong and capable, a pillar to their family and
a help to their village. Martial skill is especially prized, and a man
or a woman who can hold their own in battle is certain to gain respect
by it. Such strength in war is always honored, but great wisdom, great
skill, and great charisma are also worthy of veneration. Foreigners who
show themselves as being strong and useful will be accepted in ways less
capable strangers never will be.

[Generosity]{.Bold-Italic ._idGenCharOverride-2}: Strength is good, but
so too is wealth. The man or woman who can feed their kindred in hard
times is the leader of that clan, and those who can arm and armor their
friends will be sure to have spears to defend them.

The Noble Virtues

Individual men and women may value other things than the traits above,
but the people as a whole can be expected to cling tightly to these
virtues. Nobles and those who would be thought noble also add two more
important values.

[Honor]{.Bold-Italic ._idGenCharOverride-2}: A Courontine noble who
makes a vow is expected to carry it out, whatever the cost. Indeed, to
the Riu mind, the more terrible and painful the price of fulfilling the
vow the more glorious it is. To break an oath is to spoil the story of
events, turning a noble sacrifice into a wretched, muddy little cheat.
Only a noble utterly devoid of pride and self-respect would ever go back
on their solemnly-given word, for the humiliation of it would be too
much for their ego to bear. This rule is sometimes bent in great
affairs, for to be a grand and terrible villain is more excusable than
to be a petty liar.

[Valor]{.Bold-Italic ._idGenCharOverride-2}: Virtually every male
Courontine noble is expected to either be a warrior or a churchman. The
knights of Couront, even when landless, possess a romantic charisma
brought on by their splendid honor and glorious might in war. These arts
are often displayed in tournaments and duels but their real value comes
in the constant battles with gobelins and pagans. While women are
excused from exercising this virtue those who attain it are doubly
praised, and a baron with a war-famed wife can be expected to boast of
her to his peers.

Family Ties and Marriage

Every Montfroider's social relations revolve around their extended
family. Amid the dangers and privations of such a perilous land it is
considered an absolute necessity that a man or woman have the support of
as many relations as they can get, and that they should extend that same
help to their kindred.

[As such, marriage is a careful matter between families, with every clan
seeking to make ties to greater kindreds. The Riu tendency toward
tempestuous emotion can sometimes cut short these negotiations, as more
than a few families have found their dynastic plans derailed by a sudden
elopement.]{.CharOverride-2}

It is a strict rule of Montfroid that no man or woman may marry within
their own village, though both Boclo and Lebret often shrug at this
custom. This requirement to find spouses from elsewhere can be difficult
for the other villages. Even so, the seasonal group pilgrimages by youth
from one village monastery to another are often treated more as
matchmaking occasions than pious exercises, and the abats are known to
wink at a certain carrying-on. Alas, tragedy can strike if such pilgrims
are waylaid on their journey by gobelins or worse, so they often enlist
strong warriors to guard them.

This marriage custom often leads to clans having marriage ties with
allied families in other villages. These affiliations often give birth
to business deals, fosterage, and guesting rights, along with the
promise of help when times are hard in a village. Old families might
keep up these ties for generations, trading sons and daughters back and
forth to keep the bonds tight.

In the same fashion, old enmities can curdle for decades. A slighted
spouse or disappointed suitor can spawn a grudge that lingers for years,
whipped all the hotter by the Riu love for dramatic deeds. Outside help
is sometimes needed to end such disputes without -- or with --
bloodshed.

Gender Roles and Sexuality

In Montfroid, men are expected to manage affairs outside the home,
whether warfare, civic leadership, or dangerous labor, while women are
expected to manage the household, the servants, and the children. Men
are supposed to marry once they have accumulated enough wealth or land
to support a wife, and an unmarried man is inevitably viewed as still
somewhat half-grown, however old he may be. More than a few aging
farmhands or poor lumberjacks never earn enough to take a bride, and
unmatched spinsters can have a hard fate.

While these roles are viewed as the ideal, pragmatic necessity on the
frontier leads to a certain flexibility. Montfroider traditions allow
for women to take up male roles or males to act as household chatelaines
when necessary.

The Church is very clear that sexual relations are licit only between
lawfully-wedded husbands and wives. Adultery is counted a crime worthy
of public shaming, but village wantons and a few Castelnou courtesans
still manage to find a living. Assignations among the youth are taken
much less seriously, as long as there's some prospect of marriage for
them.

Homosexual relations are absolutely forbidden by the Church, and divorce
is permitted only for adultery or abandonment. The Riu temperament
cannot help but appreciate a good romantic tragedy, however, and two
same-sex lovers may be blatantly involved so long as they continue to
portray it as a frustrated passion that can never be openly
acknowledged. Even more conventional adulterers may be overlooked by
their spouse if the cheating is clearly the fruit of heartfelt longing
and suitably artistic sentiment. This tacit tolerance would vanish in a
moment if the participants ever tried to make it a tediously mundane
social fact, however, which can make a sham-tragedy into a more
heartfelt sorrow at times.

Classes and Professions in Montfroid

Montfroid is a relatively flat society, as there aren't enough people in
the diocesi to support much distance between the top and bottom of its
hierarchy. Even so, four major social divisions are understood to exist
by all the natives.

[The nobles]{.Bold-Italic ._idGenCharOverride-2} constitute the videms,
barons, and sieurs of Montfroid and their immediate families. More
distant relations may be thought of as having "good blood", but the
formal dignities of nobility adhere only to the noble, their spouse,
their children, and their siblings.

Montfroider nobles are lax compared to the grandees of the capital, but
they still expect courtesy and deference from their lessers. A lord may
have absolute authority over their own village, but few seek to wield it
carelessly; they are too close to their subjects to escape the
consequences of tyranny.

[The clergy]{.Bold-Italic ._idGenCharOverride-2} largely stand apart
from Montfroid's secular life, with abats and abadesses remaining within
their monasteries along with their monks and nuns. The priestly capelans
are something of an exception, being obliged by their duties to
constantly minister to the people and perform the necessary rites of the
True Faith for them.

Both commoners and nobles are expected to be polite to clerics and to
defer to their wishes within their own monasteries and churches. Ancient
law makes an abat the sole master within his monastery's walls, and only
Eveque-Abat Berengar can gainsay his wishes.

[The commoners]{.Bold-Italic ._idGenCharOverride-2} are the great mass
of men and women that maintain Montfroid as a half-civilized land.
Distinctions of status among them come from differences in wealth,
martial prowess, and number of relatives. A rich merchant of Castelnou
is esteemed, but so too is the toothless old hag in Boclo who is
grandmere to a quarter of the village. To have money, a strong arm, and
many reliable friends is the dearest wish of any peasant.

[Outsiders]{.Bold-Italic ._idGenCharOverride-2} are those adventurers,
foreigners, outcasts, and criminals who lurk at the edges of Montfroider
society. They are considered dangerous at best and pestiferous at worst,
but they also make conveniently expendable forces with which to fight
the pagans, Fae, and perils of the wilds. So long as they are more
trouble to the devil than they are to the good folk of Montfroid, they
are tolerated. Should they prove to be exceptionally capable and useful,
they might rise to considerable honor, their odd ways forgiven by a
grateful people.

Trades in Montfroid

The vast majority of Montfroid's inhabitants are peasant farmers,
working fields set close by the walls of their native village. Even so,
a diocese of almost six thousand souls must have more than one trade in
it. Those noted below are merely some of the most prominent or relevant
to an adventurer's needs.

Most professions in the diocesi honor a particular patron saint, with
"holy companies" acting as unofficial guilds and social clubs for their
practitioners. These companies can often be found gathering to celebrate
feast days, aid sick members, and maintain monastic shrines to their
heavenly patron.

[Adventurers]{.Futura-PT-Demi}: The adventurers of Montfroid are a
loosely-organized lot at best, united only by their willingness to do
perilous or dubious work for due recompense. Even so, their social role
is recognized and they often share devotion to [Sent
Therese]{.Bold-Italic ._idGenCharOverride-2}, whose daring deeds balked
the schemes of the Fae lords seven times before falling to pagan spears.

[Artisans]{.Futura-PT-Demi}: Workers in wood, iron, cloth, and all the
other practical trades can be found in Montfroid, with every village
having a few families versed in such work. Their products are seldom
exquisite, but they can make much from little. Their patron is [Sent
Peyre of Nouvila]{.Bold-Italic ._idGenCharOverride-2}, whose prayers
transformed the silver altar-service of his church into silver swords
with which to drive off a besieging band of loup-garous.

[Carters]{.Futura-PT-Demi}: Brave knights of the road, carters make the
dangerous runs between villages and organize the occasional larger
caravan of pilgrims or travelers. Most are excellent shots with their
beloved crossbows. Their patron is[ Sent Anton]{.Bold-Italic
._idGenCharOverride-2}, who saved Sentlir's first settlers from winter
starvation when he forced a sled caravan through a Fae siege.

[Charcoal-Burners and Woodcutters]{.Futura-PT-Demi}: Black-grimed and
half-wild, these men and women are necessary if the villages are not to
freeze, but their work is terribly dangerous. The danger brings good
money but few live to spend it in old age. They pray to [Sent
Theobald]{.Bold-Italic ._idGenCharOverride-2}, who parted the forest
between Rossilhon and Nouvila when Fae sorcery had bound it shut.

[Farmers]{.Futura-PT-Demi}: The farmers of Montfroid keep close to the
village walls, allocating fields and pastures by ancient rights and
modern bargaining. Their patron is [Sent Botulf]{.Bold-Italic
._idGenCharOverride-2}, whose prayers rang like a consecrated bell when
he drove the Fae from the fields that would become Rossilhon.

[Fishermen and Sailors]{.Futura-PT-Demi}: These mariners are few in
Montfroid, with some in Castelnou, Boclo, and Malvezi. The seas are full
of fearsome beasts and witch-blessed pirates, and it's a brave sailor
who dares lose sight of the shore. Their patron is [Sent
Benno]{.Bold-Italic ._idGenCharOverride-2}, whose miraculous faith cowed
a kraken into meekly bringing ashore the crew of Benno's broken ship.

[Merchants]{.Futura-PT-Demi}: Traders are not overly common in
Montfroid, with perhaps a dozen in most villages and a score or two in
Castelnou or Malvezi. The latter have old ties with rich southern
families, and can buy or sell goods through them that could not
otherwise be traded in Montfroid. They pray to [Sent Amand]{.Bold-Italic
._idGenCharOverride-2}, whose piously-earned wealth was given as the
seed of a dozen monasteries during the First Establishment.

[Miners]{.Futura-PT-Demi}: Those who strike the earth are found mostly
in La Parra, where the iron mines of the diocesi ring with their picks.
Quarrymen in Lebret are also of their guild, and together they honor
[Sent Barbara]{.Bold-Italic ._idGenCharOverride-2}, whose prayers could
bring up both gold from the stones and trapped miners from fallen
tunnels.
:::

::: _idGenObjectLayout-1
::: {#Diocesi_de_Montfroid_PDF.xhtml#_idContainer013}
![](image/chevalierm_dievalassisdevantunchateau.png){._idGenObjectAttribute-1
role="presentation"}
:::
:::

::: _idGenObjectLayout-1
::: {#Diocesi_de_Montfroid_PDF.xhtml#_idContainer014}
![](image/Acharmingpaladinboywithsky-blueeyesandblondthickbrownhairdressedinshinyplatearmorholdingastaffshiningwithgoldenraysinhisha.png){._idGenObjectAttribute-1
role="presentation"}
:::
:::

::: {#Diocesi_de_Montfroid_PDF.xhtml#_idContainer015 .Two-Column-Text}
Religion in Montfroid

Montfroid is an absolutely monotheistic land, with the Church of the
Bleeding God the sole accepted faith. While strangers of other faiths
are more pitied than persecuted, scarce any Riu in Couront can imagine
revering any other god.

The Faith

Every decent Montfroider is a devotee of the Church of the Bleeding God,
for it is the chime of the churchbells and the prayers of the capelans
and other clergy that protect their villages from the wicked sorcery of
the Fae. Without God's protection both Couront and the diocesi would
surely be lost.

Courontine theology is byzantine, but to the common folk, the principles
of the True Faith are simple. Humanity is incurably wicked, so an
omnipotent God accepts torment in place of the just punishment humans
should receive. All those who accept His divine grace will obtain an
afterlife of eternal happiness and peace. Those who refuse it or seek
other gods are condemned to the sorrow of earthly rebirth, with the most
wicked doomed to reembodiment as a Fae, a Hell-bound devil, or a beast.

A faithful believer is expected to be brave, obedient, merciful,
sexually continent, industrious, and temperate, warring always with the
natural sinfulness of their human nature. Clergy add to this rules of
personal poverty, clerical obedience, and celibacy, each observed more
or less perfectly.

The Eveque-Abat Berengar is the chief of the Church in Montfroid. He
appoints the male abats and female abadesses who lead the monasteries
and nunneries of the diocesi, and he consecrates the exclusively-male
capelans who serve as priests in village churches and monastic shrines,
As simultaneous patriarch and lord of Montfroid, his word is law in both
secular and religious matters, though custom and prudence has him leave
the former affairs to the Videm Odo.

The teachings of the Church are inscribed in the Holy Scriptures, the
collected teachings of the twelve prophets that the Courontine church
recognizes. Dissident and heretical sects recognize a different number
of prophets, and hence a different scriptural canon. Some heresies seem
largely indistinguishable to outsiders, but others fall prey to bloody
Riu excess.

Foreigners who worship strange gods are pitied for their inevitable
rebirth, but as long as they do not try to spread their faith they are
ignored by all but the most zealous clerics. Most will have to learn to
endure regular attempts to convert them, however.

The terrible pagans of the Perdut are a different matter. These men and
women worship their Fae lords as awful gods and goddesses and make
hideous sacrifices in their name. Their atrocities discourage much
interest in joining their faith, but those Montfroiders who have
rejected civilization entirely sometimes seek them out to join them.
Those who survive their initiation are often the worst of scourges.

Clergy, Churches, and Monasteries

Eveque-Abat Berengar is the chief prelate of Montfroid, answerable only
to the king and a council of his peers. Beneath the eveque-abat are the
abats and abadesses who rule each monastery in the diocesi. These
sometimes-noble men and women oversee the monks and nuns of their
monastery, and take charge of the priestly capelans attached to the
place. While monks and nuns are expected to largely shun the world,
capelans are sent forth to minister to the faithful, preside over
village churches, and act as personal confessors to nobility.

Every village in Montfroid has a monastery closely adjacent to the
settlement. These monasteries are invariably stone-walled and highly
defensible, and in especially dire times entire villages have packed
within a monastery's walls to seek refuge from pagan raiders.

Aside from these monasteries, every village also has at least one church
within its palisade, the better to serve the common daily religious
needs of the laity. So important are these churches that a settlement's
boundary is measured from the furthest point its churchbells can be
heard on a windy day. Few would dare to plant fields beyond this line,
lest their land be cursed by Fae and their crops remain unblessed by
holy chimes.

The Clerical Orders

While Couront's monasteries have always jealously guarded their
independence from all but the word of their presiding eveque-abat -- and
sometimes even from him -- they have always recognized the need for some
sort of horizontal tie between institutions. Over the centuries, monks
who shared similar duties came to share sympathies and experiences with
their brethren in other monasteries, and this in time gave form to
shared monastic orders dedicated to their particular tasks.

While there are several hundred recognized clerical orders in the
Church, most are too specialized or regional to matter in Montfroid.
Instead, several more general orders predominate. A few of the more
important are noted below.

[The Order of the Bountiful Hand]{.Futura-PT-Demi}: Originally an order
dedicated to the kitchens and cellars of a monastery, the sparse
population of Montfroid has led these clergy into handling much of the
administrative work of a monastery, including collecting tithes and
taxes. While theoretically subject to the same vows of poverty as any
cleric, a member of the Hand often has the authority to grant rich
rewards of Church property to those who aid their particular purposes.

[The Order of the Crimson Rose]{.Futura-PT-Demi}: A female-exclusive
order, the nuns of this institution are dedicated to the martial defense
of their nunnery. Some of them practice unarmed arts, but most prefer to
specialize in archery and the use of short blades. Those of the order
not occupied in guarding their nunnery are often sent to noble families
to train their daughters in matters of theology and self-defense.

[The Order of Thorns]{.Futura-PT-Demi}: One of the oldest monastic
orders, those dedicated to the Thorns serve both as investigators into
heresy and students of pious sorcery. They alone determine the probity
of religious practices or magical arts, though few Thorns are actual
mages. While it remains for the abat of a monastery to actually
determine punishments or corrections, the word of a senior Thorn will
determine whether or not there is anything to punish.

[The Order of the Wounds of God]{.Futura-PT-Demi}: The male counterpart
to the Crimson Rose, monks of this order provide the muscle to defend
their monasteries. Church law prohibits male clergy from the intentional
use of lethal violence against humans, so the Wounds train extensively
in unarmed combat, clubs, staves, and the use of ball-headed crossbow
bolts that are theoretically non-lethal.

Heresies of Montfroid

The heresies of Montfroid tend to come not from a lack of faith, but an
excess of interpretation. Common folk are so eager to win the favor of
God that they will sometimes go to wrongful lengths to placate Heaven,
and zealous monks will sometimes be taken with ideas incompatible with
the True Faith. Those who repent of their errors can escape with no more
than mild penance, and only determined and dangerous heresiarchs need
fear the stake. Alas, such lenience has made it difficult to root out
the errors enumerated below.

[Lazacs]{.Futura-PT-Demi}: Heirs of the teachings of the disgraced and
long-destroyed monastery of Sent Lazac, the Lazacs believe that the gods
worshiped by other nations are true divinities, yet subordinate to the
Bleeding God. Their capelans have obscure teachings involving the
theurgic compulsion of lesser deities by the correct prayers to God.
Common heretics understand little of this, knowing only that it is
acceptable to worship other gods so long as God is reverenced above
them. They'll make almost anything a god so long as it offers them some
immediate benefit, a practice that often leads to tragedy when the wrong
spirit is propitiated.

[Peyrists]{.Futura-PT-Demi}: Followers of the long-dead Abat Peyre de
Cros, the Peyrists are ferocious zealots who seek unity with God through
personal suffering and asceticism. Their adherents actually
[drink]{.Italic ._idGenCharOverride-3} the Sacred Blood of Church ritual
rather than receive it as a mark on their brow, and view no danger too
great or suffering too terrible so long as it is in God's service. They
are condemned by the Church for their excessive faith in humanity's
ability to induce God's favor through mortal action, but the heroic
self-sacrifice of certain Peyrist folk heroes has made them annoyingly
popular among the commoners.

[Montagnards]{.Futura-PT-Demi}: Reclusive adherents of Sent Rixenda,
Abadesse of Sent Vezian, the Montagnard heresy once had a stronghold in
Lebret before being rooted out by an abat who ironically was a Lazac.
Their Sent Rixenda was famous for her wit and ability to trick the
Devil, but the Montagnards claim to have received a secret scripture
from her instructing them in arts and rituals that would turn the
Devil's power back on him. Their priests practice unorthodox rites and
are condemned as being unwitting servants of the Devil, though many say
that the rites work well enough to keep the villagers alive in dangerous
places.
:::

::: _idGenObjectLayout-1
::: {#Diocesi_de_Montfroid_PDF.xhtml#_idContainer016}
![](image/Ablindoldmanholdsinhishandsasacredbooksurroundedbyburningcandles.heisasageinarobe.thewindowsofthetempleshinewithwhitelight.png){._idGenObjectAttribute-1
role="presentation"}
:::
:::

::: {#Diocesi_de_Montfroid_PDF.xhtml#_idContainer017 .Basic-Text-Frame}
  Monastery       Serving     Abat                   Pop.   General Repute
  --------------- ----------- ---------------------- ------ -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Sent Miquel     Castelnou   Eveque-Abat Berengar   33     [Seat of the Church in Montfroid, if a little worldly in its ways]{.CharOverride-3}
  Sent Pradeus    Malvezi     Abadesse Galienne      23     [An elegant nunnery with a considerable martial reputation]{.CharOverride-3}
  Sent Alfonzec   Nouvila     Abat Ferrandos         18     [Most scholarly monastery, with an old baronial archive]{.CharOverride-3}
  Sent Beat       Rossilhon   Abadesse Amicie        26     [A nunnery with special care for the poor, sick, and mad]{.CharOverride-3}
  Breumont        La Parra    Abat Chabert           22     [Newest and most rough-edged, with many miner-monks]{.CharOverride-3}
  Sent Tousson    Frivet      Abat Montrose          15     [Known for an exquisite artisanship dedicated to God]{.CharOverride-3}
  Sent Dalmas     Lebret      Abat Simos             25     [Stern stronghold of orthodoxy, vigilant for Lebret's errors]{.CharOverride-3}
  La Mota         Boclo       Abat Tibaut            12     [Practically a family-owned monastery, insular and secretive]{.CharOverride-3}
:::

::: {#Diocesi_de_Montfroid_PDF.xhtml#_idContainer018 .Two-Column-Text}
Joglars, Troubadours, and Chansons

The Courontines are the distant heirs of the ancient poet-kings of the
Seven Rivers Confederacy, and they honor great verse the way other
peoples honor great heroes. Montfroiders are no different than their
southern countrymen in this respect, and there are two special social
roles in the diocesi that rely on a mastery of all things spoken and
sung.

Joglars

Joglars -- and female joglaressas -- range from hayseed apprentices just
released from their master's tutelage to the honored court joglars of
the noble families. Even the least capable joglar will be able to recite
at least two hundred chansons from memory and compose extemporaneous
verse on demand. All are expected to be proficient in lute, drum, and
harp, and to have a keen knowledge of diocesi law, custom, and heraldry.

Most joglars come to the role as apprentices, taking service with a
master no later than their sixteenth spring. For five years they serve
as a dogsbody and laborer, graduating to an accompanist as their skills
improve. Their service ends on the first day of summer after five years
of training. It is then that they are gifted with a musical instrument
by their master during a village celebration meant to memorialize their
first independent performance. The quality of the instrument and the
size of the celebration can vary considerably, depending on the master's
means and the student's talents.

A joglar is obliged to earn their living by their own arts. Most travel
between villages, accompanying merchant caravans as entertainment and
encouragement before spending a week or two performing. Winter has them
settling down with a prosperous patron if they're fortunate, or a
peasant willing to trade a place by the fire for his children's
instruction. A joglar's apprentice is often hired out by their master
for day labor when no one can be found to pay for a song, and sometimes
even the master himself must hew wood or haul sheaves.

The best joglars can hope to be chosen as the herald of a noble family,
responsible for recording their great deeds, accompanying warriors to
tournaments and war, and reciting laudatory verse as needed. Others
freelance as heralds to less established warriors, taking pay to praise
them on tournament days and sing encouraging verse before battle.

The worst joglars, on the other hand, can barely keep from starvation.
The Montfroiders are a particular people about the quality of their
performers, and a joglar without real talent is often reduced to theft,
fraud, and the impecunious wooing of elderly spinsters.

There are perhaps three dozen active joglars and joglaressas in
Montfroid. Each village's ruling family has a herald, some of them also
having an apprentice, while the rest can be found playing in the
taverns, village squares, workshops, and occasionally the open fields
during harvest. The best of them prefer to perform in Castelnou, if they
can match the high standards of the town. No Courontine would dream of
profaning even a badly-performed chanson with jeering and rotten
vegetables, but their dead silence can be a harsher rebuke by far.

Troubadours

The poet-princes of a latter age, troubadours and trobairitz are those
joglars or joglaresses who have so awed their contemporaries by their
skills that they are pronounced the greatest performers of their
generation. As such a title requires the unanimous assent of every court
herald in Montfroid, the honor is conferred but rarely.

Once recognized, a troubadour can expect reverent hospitality throughout
the diocesi and rich gifts for the honor of their performances. A
blooded horse is considered a fitting payment for a knighting-day poem
for some noble son, and a cloak embroidered in silken thread might be
given to warm a trobairitz's shoulders after her song at a noble's
banquet. Such gifts are often passed along lightly by the recipient, for
the kind of men and women who become troubadours seldom care overmuch
for anything other than their verse.

The Chansons of Couront

Both joglars and troubadours deal in chansons, those poems and songs
composed to commemorate some great deed or bitter tragedy. These
chansons are often put to music, but their true heart is in their
beautifully-wrought words.

Chansons are intensely meaningful to Courontines. They believe that to
hear a fine chanson is to be strengthened by it; one gets courage from
the tale of a brave knight, wisdom from the song of some great folly,
and sympathetic comfort from the lay of another's grievous loss.

Most cultures would readily agree that verses can have power to move the
heart, but to the Riu of Couront this is more than a figure of speech.
Their very nation was forged out of stories told by the poet-kings of
old, and it is a very tangible, concrete strength they take from the
songs of their joglars. Frightened peasant militia and hard-pressed
knights find fresh courage when a joglar shouts out some storied
couplet, and everyone knows that the poet-kings of old could work
outright miracles with the power of their verse. To repeat it is to
share in that power and to keep it strong and true for the generations
that follow.

Because of this, chansons are universally honored by the people. One
does not interrupt a chanson lightly, even one badly-recited, nor does
one intentionally change the words for any reason whatsoever. Chansons
are never performed from a text; if the reciter has not engraved the
verse on his heart, he has not honored it sufficiently to perform it for
others.

New verses are made constantly by joglars, every village skirmish,
notorious love affair, and seasonal tournament throwing off a half-dozen
new poems. These poems only attain the dignity of chansons when a
troubadour chooses to perform them at least once a year for seven
consecutive years.

Chansons can be lost as less popular ones fade out of the repertoire of
joglars. Most are never written down, as it is considered vaguely
insulting to suggest that a chanson might need help to be transmitted to
a future generation. Even so, ancient books of verse can hold great
treasures for their finders.

Famous Troubadours

Montfroid is considered exceptionally graced in art of late, for no less
than three living artists bear the crown of a troubadour. Two of them
were honored in a prior generation, while a new voice has just been
blessed no more than two years ago, much to her mother's pride.

[Troubadour Guilhem de Montberon]{.Bold-Italic ._idGenCharOverride-2} is
a rakish wanderer just past his prime, with a thick black mane, a
prominent nose, and a love for the gaudiest possible dress his patronage
can afford him. He roams the roads of Montfroid with a carelessness that
belies its danger, trusting in his quick wits and his fine judgment of
horseflesh to see him clear. He has declined to take any apprentice of
late, awaiting a worthy talent.

Guilhem loves nothing more than composing songs about brave adventurers
and noble paladins of the faith. He will go out of his way to inform
young freebooters of good chances for glory and fame, giving sound
information to them in exchange for promises of a full retelling of
their deeds once they return. He is particularly sympathetic toward
novices, and more than one battered, luckless party has found their inn
rooms paid for and their healer's bills settled by the troubadour.

If Guilhem should have a vice, it lies in his womanizing. He has an
especial fondness for saucy peasant wenches, telling them tales of how
their charms have distracted him from his sorrowful yearning for
Trobairitz Azalais and how much succor they could give him with but a
trace of their favors. The women he likes best are the sort least likely
to believe him, but while it makes for passing fun for most, the more
manipulative among them can often lead the troubadour into awkward
situations that require an external helper if he is to get loose with
his dignity intact.

[Troubadour Bertran de Foish]{.Bold-Italic ._idGenCharOverride-2} is a
lean and sorrowful man of graying hair and scarred limbs. Once a knight
in service to the monastery of Sent Miquel in Castelnou, he was a great
hero among his fellows and much praised for his courage and skill at
arms. He wed the beautiful daughter of a wealthy townsman of Nouvila,
sired a healthy young son, and seemed assured in all the happiness his
station could give him.

When his son was four years old, his wife received word that her father
was on his deathbed in Nouvila and desperately wished to see his
grandson before the grave took him. Bertran could not leave his post on
such short notice, but he permitted his wife to go in the company of a
pair of brave knights known to him. A day later, he received word that
the four had arrived in Rossilhon. Four days later, he learned that they
had never reached Nouvila. A desperate search showed no sign of any of
the four, and all agreed that they must have fallen prey to the dangers
of the road.

Crushed by grief, Bertran abandoned his position. For years, he sought
out joglars throughout Montfroid, seeking from them some verse that
would help him make sense of his loss or ease his sorrow. He collected
their songs with frantic determination, eventually composing his own in
a vain attempt to cure his guilt. Still, if he could not ease his own
sadness, he resolved to earn redemption by heartening others.

In the twenty years since then, Bertran has roamed the roads of
Montfroid, giving out the stories he thinks his listeners most need to
hear. Along with his tales he has been known to give the benefit of his
strong right arm as well, with more than a few gobelins and loup-garous
sent back to Hell by his blade. He is growing gray with age, and his
sight is not as good as it once was, but he stubbornly maintains his
circuit through Couront, journeying as far as Auvergne in his
peregrinations. When he hears of trouble that he cannot tend to himself
he often charges young adventurers with the task, promising them a
reward of laudatory verse if they do well in their work.

[Trobairitz Azalais, the Winter Queen,]{.Bold-Italic
._idGenCharOverride-2} is the eldest daughter of Barona Sancha of
Malvezi, a young woman of nineteen years possessed of artistic
brilliance and a pale beauty that astonishes her peers. Her verses have
delighted her mother's noble guests from girlhood, when she was
apprenticed to the Malvezi herald, Maressa du Bosc, and by sixteen she
was eagerly sought as a guest by every abat and noble in Montfroid.
Joglars sing her songs at every village inn, and to have been present at
one of her performances is considered a necessity for any who would
pretend to culture.

In truth, however, Azalais is an agonizingly shy young woman who suffers
from paralyzing social anxiety. She feels a deep obligation to use her
gifts to encourage and hearten her countrymen, but she's terrified that
her words will not be enough to give her people what they need. While
her lyrical genius is unparalleled, when actually face-to-face with an
admirer she finds it almost impossible to speak to them for fear of
disappointing their expectations.

This terror has been mistaken for icy superiority. At least six young
noblemen have attempted to woo her in the past two years, each one
taking her chill silence as a cutting dismissal. It's even become
something of a fashion for a young scion to show his courage and
excellent taste by confessing love to the Winter Queen. Of course, each
time her inability to answer them adequately drives Azalais into a
deeper despair.

Only her peers in the art, Bertran de Foish and Guilhem de Montberon,
know the truth of her shyness. The two have attempted to shoo off her
suitors by pretending to a dramatic love triangle with the cold and
distant Azalais, each troubadour proclaiming his undying love for her
and condemning all "rivals" as unsuitable.

The two make a great business of publicly challenging each other to
various artistic extravagances in order to "prove their worthiness", but
the heartfelt afternoons they spend with Azalais in the Malvezi gardens
are actually devoted to poetic shop-talk and gentle encouragements to
trust in her own talents. Their affection for her is paternal rather
than romantic, as Bertran still hasn't gotten over the loss of his wife
and Guilhem likes his women rather more plump and vulgar.
:::

::: {#Diocesi_de_Montfroid_PDF.xhtml#_idContainer019 .Two-Column-Text}
Pagans and the Fae

While the forests of Montfroid are plagued with all the usual array of
horrors to be found in the Latter Earth's wild places, the two that its
people dread the most are those who were born from their own distant
kin.

The Nature of the Fae

When the first Confederate exiles were driven into the eastern
hinterlands, the Blighted that dwelled there were much like their
southern kindred. Prehistoric human populations had long before been
forged into weapons of war by their Outsider masters, the wretched
creatures infused with an unquenchable hatred for their traitorous human
brethren. Ancient Anakim, monstrous beastmen, and vile mutants of every
description infested in the cold forests of the north.

While these Blighted were merely tormenting exiles and burning the
proto-monasteries of the Bleeding God, they were of little importance to
the poet-kings. With the great dispersal of Confederate refugees after
the meteor's fall, however, they became a mortal danger to the few
remaining Riu survivors.

To save their people from a miserable doom, the remaining poet-kings
joined with the ancient Church to compose mighty chansons of victory,
their verses telling of the invincible courage of their people and their
inevitable triumph against the forces of darkness. With the power of the
remaining Workings of the Seven Rivers, the poet-kings were able to
shackle the Blighted into shapes and fates foreordained by their songs.

These ancient poet-kings were, however, unable to escape their own
dramaturgical expectations. Needing grand villains, they sang the
chieftains of the Blighted into great and terrible Fae lords, majestic
and fearsome in their power. Despising armies as mere collections of
insignificant rabble, they forced the lesser Blighted into stunted,
twisted shapes as gobelins. Some say that even the intrinsic hatred and
malice that the Outsiders first bred into them was set and fixed by the
curse of the poet-kings as a necessary narrative device.

Whatever the truth of it, those ancient Fae have birthed generations of
war and bloodshed. The wild places of Couront belong to them, and some
whole regions remain sunk under their sorcerous rule. In Montfroid the
Terra Perduda is one such place, a land cursed to serve the cruel whims
of the Fae lords and their red, pitiless purposes.

Fae Lords and Gobelins

The lords of the Fae are immortal. Once they rise to their position
through cunning, enchantment, and savage violence, they will persist
forever, whether they will it or not. Should they be killed by human
hands or a treacherous underling, they will simply reappear within the
lands of Faerie, reborn with a fresh grudge and no lasting harm.

Scholars say that their immortality is an unintended byproduct of the
Great Chansons of the poet-kings. The chansons swear that the Fae will
never drive out the True Faith from Couront, even if they should fight
until mountains fall and the seas run dry. It appears the converse is
true as well; the Fae lords cannot die unless the Riu are driven
entirely from their lands. In Montfroid, the only known instance of the
true death of a Fae lord occurred at the end of the First Establishment,
when the Ash Duke successfully wiped out human habitation from the
diocesi only to collapse into dust moments later. Most of his successors
in the Terra Perduda do not care to risk emulating his end, and so
contain their evils.

Instead, the Fae lords dwell in grand witch-raised castles and eldritch
glens deep within the Perdut, holding court with their hordes of
misshapen gobelin servitors and loup-garou courtiers. There they are
bored as only the immortal are bored, amused only by suffering and black
jests. They retain the natural hatred of humanity that their makers
placed in their heart, but they have grown so whimsical and wearied over
the centuries that even their cruelties have grown strange.

Their servants, the misshapen gobelins and the man-wolven loup-garous,
are not so burdened with eternity. While loup-garous breed as humans do,
as do some gobelins, others are merely brought forth from toadstools,
cursed bogs, or evil music as their masters require. Their lives mean
nothing to their lords except as sources of amusement or pawns in their
endless, desultory wars with their peers.

While Fae lords are invariably beautiful or awe-inspiring in some
fashion, gobelins and loup-garous are not so blessed. The former usually
appear as twisted dwarves with misshapen features and bulging eyes,
while the latter often show unnatural hirsuteness and unpleasantly sharp
teeth in their human guise. Even so, some gobelin leaders, loup-garou
tempters, or Fae witches partake of their master's beauty in strange and
unsettling ways.

The Pagans

Most Confederate refugees clustered around the monasteries of the
Bleeding God, but not all sought refuge there. Some bands ventured
deeper into the wilds, there becoming prey to the hungers of the Fae and
the dangers of the wilderness. In desperation, they offered eternal
service to the Fae lords as ransom for their lives. Much to their
eventual sorrow, their offer was accepted.

Ever since, these "pagans" have been shackled to the Fae lords, raised
from birth to regard them as terrible gods in need of bloody
propitiation. They have been used as playthings, objects of torment, and
subjects of savage whim, their customs bent and twisted by masters who
desire that they live only to suffer. Different pagan tribes may have
different habits but all of them lead terrible lives of fear, hatred,
and violence. Were it not for the intervention of their masters and the
Fae desire to prolong the entertainment, they would have wiped
themselves out centuries ago.

The Fae lords send their pagan servants west to plunder Montfroid's
people and immiserate their lives. The greatest warriors among them are
rewarded with places at their lord's side and the pleasures only a
devil-sorcerer can grant. The weak, kindly, or foolish among them are
food for their kin.

Pagans are of the same Riu stock as Montfroiders, but are usually
scarred, tattooed, and adorned with numerous painful decorations. The
markings show rank within their tribe, and help ensure that none of them
can readily desert and blend in with more peaceful folk.

Even so, it is not entirely unknown for a pagan to seek refuge among
Montfroiders. The great majority are merely losers of some tribal
quarrel who would rather risk a quick death from the faithful than the
lingering torture of their kin. If they can convince the Montfroiders
not to kill them out of hand they might have a chance to survive, but
most of them have such savage habits that they cannot live alongside the
faithful. There are probably no more than a dozen former pagans in all
of Montfroid, and most of them are hunters, woodcutters, or others who
dwell in near-solitude.

More common are Montfroiders turned pagan. Most of these unfortunates
are children stolen young and raised as weapons against their own
kindred. The Fae find it amusing to set sons against fathers this way,
and anything that demoralizes and immiserate the hated believers is to
be celebrated. Now and then an exceptionally brave band of heroes can
snatch these young victims from a pagan tribe, but most such efforts
require journeys deep into the Perdut, and few ever return.

Worse than these war-prizes are those traitors, heretics, and madmen who
intentionally seek out the pagans to join their cause. Some are
criminals fleeing the noose, others are bloodthirsty brutes who want
more latitude for murder, and a few are lunatics who see the Fae as the
true gods of Couront. Most of these petitioners are tortured to death
out of hand, but the strongest, cruelest, and most ruthless of their
number might yet live to be accepted into a warband. Those who survive
their initiation often become the most effective enemies of their former
neighbors.

The Fae and the True Faith

With sheer numbers, the Fae would be certain to overcome Montfroid in
open warfare. That they do not is not entirely due to their lords'
reluctance to test the limits of their immortality. Fae are subject to
certain intrinsic weaknesses woven into them by the Great Chansons.

[Fae fear churchbells. ]{.Bold-Italic ._idGenCharOverride-2}The mere
sound of a properly-consecrated bell will cause a Fae lord to
spontaneously combust. Weaker Fae are less powerfully affected; gobelins
will flee madly at the bell's peal, but a loup-garou can withstand it,
though they greatly detest the sound. Churchbells will also shatter Fae
spells and break Fae curses, washing their evil sorcery from land and
people alike.

[Fae are harmed by the touch of iron.]{.Bold-Italic
._idGenCharOverride-2} Fae lords are scorched by it as if it were
red-hot, while weaker gobelins merely cry out in pain if touched by it.
As a consequence, Fae weapons and armor are always of bronze or magical
glass. Loup-garous are not vulnerable to this curse, but are instead
burnt by silver.

[Fae cannot enter consecrated ground.]{.Bold-Italic
._idGenCharOverride-2} The holy ground of a monastery or churchyard is a
sure barrier to any Fae. If they are somehow dragged within its bounds,
they can do nothing but flee wildly once released. Loup-garous can defy
this ban in human form, but they lose all their unholy powers within.

Because of these weaknesses the Fae lords often find it necessary to use
pagans and traitors to carry out certain tasks. The sacred chime of the
bells does nothing to defend a village from a ravening pagan warband,
and the most holy monastery cannot keep out a heretic in service to Fae
gods. The many monastic ruins in Montfroid can almost all be credited to
the work of pagan invaders. The remaining few others are merely sad
memorials to quarrels among the faithful and those harms that cannot be
blamed on inhuman malice.
:::

::: _idGenObjectLayout-1
::: {#Diocesi_de_Montfroid_PDF.xhtml#_idContainer020}
![](image/Aharshandbrutalbarbarianwomanchallengesanewopponenttoaduelwithapalmgesturesheisamuscularwarriorinbearskinswithredhairblood.png){._idGenObjectAttribute-1
role="presentation"}
:::
:::

::: _idGenObjectLayout-1
::: {#Diocesi_de_Montfroid_PDF.xhtml#_idContainer021}
![](image/Vikingwarriorwomanfacingaskullshapeddungeon-fantasydigitalillustration.png){._idGenObjectAttribute-1
role="presentation"}
:::
:::

::: {#Diocesi_de_Montfroid_PDF.xhtml#_idContainer022 .Two-Column-Text}
Magic and Forms of Sorcery

There are few wizards in Montfroid, and those that exist are not
particularly welcome. Even so, the Riu must grudgingly admit the utility
of having a few natives competent to understand the subtleties of magic,
provided they stay within the boundaries marked by the Church.

Mages in Montfroid

There are few known wizards of any kind in Montfroid. The individual
write-ups for the communities of the diocesi mention any known
spellcasters among the locals, and these few men and women are the only
ones that PCs might reliably hope to meet for magical services. Any
native PC mage likely served out their apprenticeship to one of them.

Of these wizards, the Church in Montfroid divides them into four
categories of varying virtue. Some are entirely licit, others merely
tolerated, and a few are viewed with fear and hatred. A wizard suspected
of practicing dark sorcery is likely to be interrogated by the Order of
Thorns, and while torture is not common, a ransacking of their grimoire
is. The local abat must pass sentence on any found guilty, but those
wizards who serve the Black Pact or bargain with Hell face certain
death.

[Natural philosophers]{.Bold-Italic ._idGenCharOverride-2} are lay
scholars who practice magic as an intellectual discipline. They invoke
arcane powers through the manipulation of secret or subtle natural laws
rather than through the favor of supernatural entities. Montfroiders
view such practices as tolerable, if somewhat hazardous to a
practitioner's spiritual health. Natural philosophers are most often
Elementalists, though some theory-focused High Mages exist among them.

[Theurgists]{.Bold-Italic ._idGenCharOverride-2} are Church-sanctioned
wizards, generally monks or nuns of the Order of Thorns. Their arts rely
on Church ritual and specialized prayer, though the mechanics and
results of these invocations are much the same as their secular peers.
While these arcane powers are respected by the Church, they are not
entirely trusted; a theurgist will never rise high in the hierarchy, and
they watch each other carefully for signs of heresy or diabolism. Most
are High Mages, but theurgists alone are permitted to study the arts of
Necromancy. Such "consecrators" are to use their powers for the
destruction and subdual of the undead, never for their creation.

[Sorcerers]{.Bold-Italic ._idGenCharOverride-2} make up a catch-all
category for foreign spellcasters of all types. These outsiders know
nothing of the True Faith and probably pray to heathen gods for their
powers. Study of such unclean magic is wholly forbidden to all decent
Courontines. Even so, it is better to tolerate it among foreigners
rather than risk the disastrous consequences of picking a fight with a
mage of unknown powers. Such wizards are endured only so long as their
good behavior lasts, and seldom are they much loved by Montfroiders.

[Diabolists]{.Bold-Italic ._idGenCharOverride-2} are all those who turn
to Hell for their powers, or who give worship to unclean demons in
exchange for arcane might. All wizards of the Black Pact are numbered
among their kind, as well as the fae witches of the Terra Perduda and
the heretical petitioners of the Montagnards. Any mage might secretly be
a diabolist and it is this risk that makes Montfroiders so uneasy around
arcanists. A wizard convicted of diabolism by the Order of Thorns can
expect a warm stake and a grave of scattered ashes soon after.

Other Arcane Paths

Aside from spellcasters, practitioners of other esoteric arts can be
found in isolated parts of the diocesi. Their numbers are very few, but
they are not entirely unknown. PCs who want to belong to a particular
class can use the guides below to shape their background, if the GM so
permits.

[Healers]{.Bold-Italic ._idGenCharOverride-2} exist in a few
monasteries, having been gifted with natural talent and honed by the
ancient practices of the Church. The nunnery of Sent Beat in Nouvila has
three sisters blessed with the art to help tend the sick that gather
there, and young Paire Guiscard in Castelnou has recently shown aptitude
for holy healing. Montfroid has no institution to formally seek and
train these people, however, and so they must rely on chance and the
ill-understood scriptures of healing to bring them to notice.

[Beastmasters]{.Bold-Italic ._idGenCharOverride-2} are usually known
only among the pagans, who make hideous offerings to the Fae lords in
exchange for command over the wild beasts of the Perdut. A few holy
hermits are said to command animals by the grace of God, however, and
there are a handful of back-country hunters and trappers who show an
uncanny skill at training animals.

[Shapeshifters]{.Bold-Italic ._idGenCharOverride-2} are also almost
exclusive to the heathens of the east, who learn the arts of twisted
seeming from their fae mentors. Certain Montfroider wizards are also
known to have the art, and often to misuse it. Those who do have the
secret tend to hide it, lest they be mistrusted by their fellows.

[Blood Priests]{.Bold-Italic ._idGenCharOverride-2} are found only among
the Peyrist heretics, and so are very scarce. While they are often
honored by the common folk, the adamant objections of the Courontine
Church make it impossible for them to participate comfortably in
society, leaving them hermits and loners. While few abats would risk
angering the populace by imprisoning them, that leniency would vanish if
the Blood Priest seemed bent on spreading the Peyrist heresy.

[Vowed]{.Bold-Italic ._idGenCharOverride-2} are the second-most common
of the magic-touched in Montfroid. Every monastery and nunnery has some
members in the martial orders, and all of these receive at least basic
training in the martial skills of the Vowed. These techniques have
spread out into the common populace over the years, and while they are
rare among the layfolk, they are not unknown.

[Bards]{.Bold-Italic ._idGenCharOverride-2} as described in the [Atlas
of the Latter Earth]{.Italic ._idGenCharOverride-3} are by far the most
frequently encountered practitioners of an esoteric path in Couront. All
the best joglars have at least a little of their special arts, and a
true troubadour stands tall in their mastery. Unlike some other subtle
paths, the arts and techniques of bardic skill are praised and widely
shared in Montfroid.

[Mageslayers]{.Bold-Italic ._idGenCharOverride-2}, also from the
[Atlas]{.Italic ._idGenCharOverride-3}, are almost unknown. The few that
exist are specialists of the clerical Order of Thorns, witch-hunters
dedicated to the execution of diabolists before they can work such
horrors as Sabas Lag did with the Green Death. There is only one
witch-hunter in Montfroid at present, old Paire Luculle, who has sent in
vain to Auvergne for a successor. He may be forced to train one of his
own if Montfroid is not to be left unarmed against the dark.

Hermits, Witches, and Warlocks

All respectable theurgists and natural philosophers dwell in a monastery
or village and are expected to keep on good social terms with their
neighbors. A wizard who chooses to dwell alone or hide from his fellows
is automatically suspect; the horrors of Sabas Lag and the fall of the
Second Establishment are too well-known for anyone to feel easy about
the hidden work of sorcerers. Folk imagine that so long as Master
Guderian shows up to church every Sunday and does not forbid the
charwoman from cleaning his inner rooms there is only so much evil he
can do.

This is not the case for wizards who are determined to live in the
wilderness. They could be doing anything out there in the ruins and
caves of Montfroid, and what they are doing is probably bad. Videms
sometimes send bands of investigators to call on these sorcerers and
discover their doings, so the lesser among them prefer to keep moving
and the greater to use spells of warding and concealment. Of the wizards
known for their reclusive ways, a few are of special note.

[Mistress Thusnelda]{.Bold-Italic ._idGenCharOverride-2} dwells in a
little cottage in the Bosc Rimasser, its location moving regularly. Once
a well-born girl of Castelnou, she met a Fae witch in the forest and
gave over her faith for the promise of eternal youth and delight. For
forty years she has preserved her beauty with the flesh of men and
women, whom she takes once or twice a year as the opportunities arrive.
When not in need of ingredients she is charming, vivacious, and
friendly, and has been known to do favors for petitioners.

[Garstang the Pelted]{.Bold-Italic ._idGenCharOverride-2} is said to
live in a half-fallen tower near the ruins of Blanchafort, deep in the
Forest of Tall Wolves. He is a shapeshifter and a diabolist, father to
many loup-garous and even more evil deeds. Men say he wishes to spread
the plague of lycanthropy to all of Montfroid, and that somewhere within
Blanchafort is the secret he seeks. Many bold adventurers have sought to
claim his head and the rich rewards that would come of it, but all have
thus far failed.

[The Bog Witch]{.Bold-Italic ._idGenCharOverride-2} is a legend of the
Maresc, a sorceress said to have been Sabas Lag's daughter, or lover, or
demon, or all three. She lives in a house of wet reeds and mud that
floats through the sodden ways of the swamp, gathering treasures and
prey to itself by witchery and snares. She eats her fill of what it
takes and leaves the rest to float away. Old tales say that she knows
the secrets of every mortal sickness and can cure even death, but the
price she demands for her help is more than a godly heart could bear to
pay.

[Lucien the Recurrent]{.Bold-Italic ._idGenCharOverride-2} is a wretched
figure and a cautionary tale. Once an over-proud natural philosopher of
Castelnou, he delved too deeply into the secrets of the poet-kings and
their narrative sorcery. His studies left him talebound and condemned to
play the part of the Evil Sorcerer, forever building schemes to plague
the good people of Montfroid until a hero can slay him. His death is
never lasting, and a generation later he always appears again with some
fresh machination. His only hope is that some clever hero might subvert
his story and turn his evil plot into an unexpected blessing for the
diocesi.
:::

::: {#Diocesi_de_Montfroid_PDF.xhtml#_idContainer023 .Two-Column-Text}
A Glossary of Places

Montfroid is a hazardous place, and few natives dare to go far from
their villages without numerous well-armed companions. Even so, some
bold adventurers have courage enough to seek the far reaches of the
diocesi, the better to plunder its past.

[]{#Diocesi_de_Montfroid_PDF.xhtml#_idTextAnchor000}Communities

Dozens of villages and towns have been lost over the centuries, but
eight still stand in the present day. Their populations are given below,
along with their ruler and the capitani of their village militia, who
fights as a Warrior of the given level if needed.

[Boclo]{.Futura-PT-Demi}: An isolated village founded by unwilling
refugees during the Second Establishment, Boclo lives by fishing and
herb-gathering. Occasionally a trader's ship sails up Descrocs Bay and
into Lac Char to trade furs for the things they cannot make themselves,
but otherwise their only outside contact are the spring and autumn
visits of the eveque-abat's representative to confirm its youth in the
faith, collect taxes, and ensure no impiety has spread. The Bocloers are
not eager for more visitors than that.

[Castelnou]{.Futura-PT-Demi}: This modest town serves as the capital of
Montfroid, where Videm Odo rules as secular viceroy of the Eveque-Abat
Berengar. Most of what little foreign trade comes into the diocesi docks
at Castelnou's wharves, and little fishing-boats will venture out from
the town as far as Sortiz. Foreigners are a rare sight anywhere in
Montfroid, but perhaps a little less rare in Castelnou. The town is
proud of its tall stone walls and high-crowned keep, and there have been
times in the past few centuries when most of Montfroid has had to crowd
within for safety.

[Frivet]{.Futura-PT-Demi}: One of the younger villages in Montfroid,
Frivet was built to guard the trade road between Malvezi and Castelnou.
With the Hammersea often impassible from Black Pact pirates and sea
monsters, most internal commerce within Montfroid runs along this road,
which stretches from Nouvila in the north to Malvezi in the south. With
its central location, an unusual number of craftsmen and merchants have
found a place within its palisade.

[La Parra]{.Futura-PT-Demi}: A rough hill-village of stacked stones and
pine logs, La Parra's miners are on the sharp edge of dealings with
pagan raiders and gobelin warbands. Its lords, the Sieurs and Dames de
la Parra, are all great warriors, though some say they would be fighting
to be the videms of all Montfroid if they were not so busy defending
their own home.

[Lebret]{.Futura-PT-Demi}: A village held in general suspicion by most
of its neighbors, Lebret has twice in the past four centuries been found
to be a nest of heresy by vigilant capelans. The monastery attached to
it, Sent Dalmas, is a regular posting for the most watchful of clerics,
and its Abat Simos is a man of great strictness. There is no open cause
for suspicion these days, but Abat Simos still seems to find enough
heretics to keep the hemp-beating house in the village well-staffed.

[Malvezi]{.Futura-PT-Demi}: A village that lives from fish and
smuggling, its ruling Malvezi family was driven from the province of
Auvergne by a political misstep. They took their wealth north with them,
and Malvezi has fortifications strong enough to stand off the pirates
and raiders that make most coastal settlement impossible in Montfroid.
Smugglers are ubiquitous around the village, and its Baroness Sancha is
said to have designs on the videmship of all Montfroid.

[Nouvila]{.Futura-PT-Demi}: A fief granted to the heirs of the Baron
Simon who once ruled the Baronnie of Montfroid, the Nouvilas have always
resented their "usurpation" by the eveque-abat and his videms. The
dangers of the Forest of Tall Wolves to their north keep them occupied,
however, and the rich soil at the foot of the hills to the east keeps
their peasants well-fed.

[Rossilhon]{.Futura-PT-Demi}: Once an important waystation between the
great monastery of Montfroid and the southern settlements, Rossilhon has
faded in importance as times have grown harder, and there are several
grand stone buildings beyond the palisade that now lie empty for lack of
inhabitants to guard them. Most of its trade comes from traffic between
Nouvila to the north and Castelnou to the west, with a few pack trains
going south to Lebret. Timber-cutters and charcoal burners venture out
often into the Bosc de Rossil, though seldom alone and sometimes never
to return.

[]{#Diocesi_de_Montfroid_PDF.xhtml#_idTextAnchor001}Islands

While small spits of land can be found many at places on the coast,
Montfroid has only ten islands of any real consequence. Only Sortiz has
any permanent inhabitants, if the beacon-tower's guards can be called
that, though almost all bear some signs of ancient occupation.

[Algais]{.Futura-PT-Demi}: A pine-forested isle surrounded by
treacherous rocks, discouraging all but the smallest and most nimble
boats from approaching. It is said the last Baron Nouvila of Montfroid's
Second Establishment fled here with his retainers in an attempt to
escape the Green Death in 305 AL, taking with him certain precious
relics of rule. The fortified manor where he died is still visible from
the coast, and men say his spirit sometimes lights blue lamps in its
tower.

[Bles]{.Futura-PT-Demi}: A cursed island in a cursed swamp, this cold
mound of creeper-entwined mire in the middle of Lac Saone shares the
name of the wizard's tower that rises from its northern end. It was once
the domain of Sabas Lag, an exile of the Black Pact who conjured the
plague that extinguished Montfroid's Second Establishment. Since the
wizard's inevitable damnation there have been many lesser sorcerers who
have sought his secrets in Bles, but few such seekers dwell long in its
crooked spire.

[Brezi]{.Futura-PT-Demi}: This small isle sometimes hosts pirates who
watch carefully for foreign ships on their way to Castelnou before
lunging out in swift oared launches to ambush their prey. If overmatched
or hunted, they cross the narrow waters to the Forest of Tall Wolves and
flee into the darkness therein. Enough end up eaten by loup-garous to
discourage this refuge, but not enough to end the isle's lawless use.

[Cabaretz]{.Futura-PT-Demi}: Louis Cabaretz perished here, the last
videm of the First Establishment. He and his loyal knights held back the
Ash Duke's hordes while Regandi's few survivors took ship from the
island's wharves, fighting to the last man to buy the refugees time to
get clear of pursuit. Most of the regalia of the First Establishment
videms was lost with him, including several relics of the Confederacy,
yet the miraculous destruction of the Ash Duke's legions makes it very
unlikely that the Fae bore any of it away. Few adventurers who would
seek it are bold enough to venture so close to the grim ruins of
Regandi.

[Manso]{.Futura-PT-Demi}: The island is little more than a disc of
ancient white stone buckled upward by the force that created the
Hammersea. It is the last remnant of some massive art structure built
during the days of the Confederacy, the whole island looking much like a
broken, tilted dinner plate buried halfway into the sea. The crumbling
south-facing side bears "the knight of Manso", a magnificently colored
four-mile-wide bas-relief of a mounted warrior brandishing a sword
against some enemy on the buried half of the disc.

[Olitz]{.Futura-PT-Demi}: With a good landing and a clear view of the
sea lanes, Olitz was the seat of the vile sea-witch Peladis a century
ago. Her ships scourged the Montfroid coast for decades until the
treachery of a lover undid her. Her monstrous pets still stalk the halls
of the Confederate ruins she took for her lair, and some that swim have
made the nearby waters perilous.

[Pena]{.Futura-PT-Demi}: "The Smuggler's Isle" in popular legend, Pena
is a regular anchorage for ships from Auvergne to the south, ostensibly
so the crew might pray at the ancient shrine of Sent Maro raised there
during the First Establishment. In practice, many cargoes are quietly
passed to Malvezi fishing boats here without burdening the videm's
harbormaster with the trouble of collecting tariffs. Sometimes these
smugglers quarrel with each other, and many a lost cargo has been hidden
for a retriever who will never come.

[Petra]{.Futura-PT-Demi}: Thousands of years ago, in the time of the
Confederacy, Petra was a pleasure-isle for the inhabitants of
Blanchafort. The pale stones of their abandoned villas and sea-watching
towers can still be found scattered amid the pines and underbrush. It is
said that things were done on Petra that could not be done in
Blanchafort, and that many of these villas had hidden chambers beneath
them for deeds that deserved no tales.

[Sent Vezian]{.Futura-PT-Demi}: Named for the First Establishment
monastery that once stood here, the Ash Duke's pagan thralls slaughtered
the island's inhabitants two thousand years ago. The most recent attempt
at re-occupation was by the Baron Malvezi's clan some three hundred
years ago, but the island is too vulnerable to pirate raids to survive
without reinforcements the Malvezis could not afford to give. Even so,
the ruins of Sent Vezian are still sometimes used as a hiding place by
bandits or by locals who still trust in the monastery's ability to repel
the Fae.

[Sortiz]{.Futura-PT-Demi}: A small watchtower was built on Sortiz at the
start of the Third Establishment, its warders charged with watching for
pirates and Black Pact raiders and lighting a warning beacon should any
make for Castelnou. A half-dozen guardians still keep the post, fishing
from the crumbling stone pier when not on duty.

[]{#Diocesi_de_Montfroid_PDF.xhtml#_idTextAnchor002}Natural Features

Montfroid is a land with brief, warm summers and long, cold winters. Its
forests of pine, birch, and spruce often hold more than mere natural
hazards.

[Bosc de Rossil]{.Futura-PT-Demi}: Several lost villages and manors of
the First Establishment have long since been swallowed by this pine
forest, but the traffic on the north road still brings pagan raiders
over the hills and loup-garous from the Forest of Tall Wolves. The
Twice-Burned Tavern wayhouse is the only safe roof between Nouvila and
Rossilhon.

[Bosc Palunos]{.Futura-PT-Demi}: Pagan raiders have made the Palunos a
base for their western incursions, often caching loot and captives here
before venturing out over the hills again. Bold souls from Boclo
sometimes come down to rob their robbers, but there are worse devils in
the forest than pagans. Fae knights are said to ride here on moonless
nights.

[Bosc Rimasser]{.Futura-PT-Demi}: The tamest of the forests of
Montfroid, the Rimasser has many woodcutters, charcoal-burners, and
hunters laboring in it by day. Tame or not, however, few dare linger at
night and face the risk of raiders or gobelin warriors.

[The Forest of Tall Wolves]{.Futura-PT-Demi}: The terrible loup-garou
clans rule in this forest. The man-wolves come in several breeds, all of
which are united in their malice toward humanity, and their cunning is
great and terrible. Those who wander beneath the forest's boughs
sometimes come back changed.

[Gobelin Woods]{.Futura-PT-Demi}: Once a great stronghold of the Fae in
western Montfroid, this forest was largely purged of its evil in
centuries past, with the ruins of several monasteries still standing as
testament to these efforts. Lesser Fae are less troubled by godly
things, however, and so bands of gobelins are still drawn to do devilish
work here.

[The Hammersea]{.Futura-PT-Demi}: A freshwater sea that never freezes,
even in the worst of winters, the Hammersea is the most common road into
Montfroid. It is not a safe road, however, as pirates from the Black
Pact or more southernly parts of Couront make travel a gamble that some
captains lose.

[The Low Forest]{.Futura-PT-Demi}: Once a rich and sheltered valley of
several villages during the First Establishment, all its inhabitants
were horribly slaughtered by the Ash Duke during the fall Montfroid's
first settlers. The forest has regrown since then, but the angry dead
still haunt its shadows, particularly around the ruins of their former
homes.

[The Maresc]{.Futura-PT-Demi}: A vast swamp of cold water and stinking
mire, the Maresc is a miserable tangle of swamp cedars and clinging
undergrowth. Bandits and worse take refuge in its hidden recesses, and
the terrible tower of Bles stands over it all as a monument to sorcerous
evil.

[Moure Hills]{.Futura-PT-Demi}: The spine of Montfroid, these hills are
not particularly high or rugged, but they are rumpled in a hundred
different places by narrow clefts, spring-fed washes, and twisting
valleys. Two caravans can pass within a hundred paces down different
draws and hear nothing of each other, and raiders from the Perdut make
use of hidden trails.

[Terra Perduda]{.Futura-PT-Demi}: Known more casually as the Perdut, the
Terra Perduda is the acknowledged realm of the Fae and their pagan
servants, a terrible wilderness of nightmares and witchcraft. Only
pagans are suffered to live there by the lords of the Perdut... and
those traitors to Couront who prove useful to them.

[Vescomte d'Auvergne]{.Futura-PT-Demi}: Montfroid's far richer southern
neighbor, the Vescomte is a greater and better-established domain, at a
greater distance from the Perdut. Most of Montfroid's outside trade is
carried in Auvergnese ships, particularly its most costly and
skillfully-made goods.

[]{#Diocesi_de_Montfroid_PDF.xhtml#_idTextAnchor003}Ruins

Like much of Couront, Montfroid is weighted down by ruins, both of its
own recorded past and the fathomless darkness that came before. Those
noted here are merely the best-known of these relics; any villager could
name four or five more within a half-day of his home that remain
unnoticed by chroniclers.

[Blanchafort]{.Futura-PT-Demi}: Here a broken white tower rises above
beautiful abandoned villas of seamless white stone. Once a place of
magical power before the Seven Rivers Confederacy fell, Blanchafort was
a rural retreat for jaded western nobility. Now its magic has been long
exhausted, and only the loup-garous hold vile court in its magnificent
dwellings.

[Bles]{.Futura-PT-Demi}: A place crusted over with foul sorcery and
lingering devils, Bles was the seat of the sorcerer Sabas Lag, who
unleashed the Green Death that purged Montfroid of almost all human life
eight centuries ago. His apparent damnation a century later has left the
swamp-girdled tower subject to the attentions of greedy wizards and
reckless pagans who come seeking the secrets he left behind.

[Folcaut's Cut]{.Futura-PT-Demi}: The miner Folcaut the Unlucky drove a
shaft into this barren hillside forty years ago, only to discover a Deep
some fifty feet down. Explorers say that it appears to be divided
between ancient subterranean fungus-farms gone wild and a small, mazey
dwelling complex. The latter appears to have been repurposed from an
older heathen temple. It seems to have egresses elsewhere in the hills,
because local monsters and pagans have been found within by the
occasional band of adventurers seeking to plunder the place.

[La Rais]{.Futura-PT-Demi}: A massive stone head the size of a small
hill rests here, its mouth yawning open in invitation. Those who have
ventured within say that several levels of inner rooms have been carved
out of the rock's interior, with a great viewing-chamber placed behind
the statue's left eye. Legends say that those who gaze through it can
see any place in Montfroid as clearly as if it were right before them,
but the loup-garous of the Forest of Tall Wolves make it a perilous
place to seek.

[Lucatz]{.Futura-PT-Demi}: The ruin of a monastery that dated back even
before the fall of the Confederacy, Lucatz was once a pious stronghold
against the dangers of the Maresc, and was a great support to the
settlers of the First Establishment. Alas, it too perished under the
bronze spears of the Ash Duke's warriors, and the swamp later ate what
the gobelins left behind. Still, even small tokens from the First Age
are of great value to those who live to find them.

[Milon's End]{.Futura-PT-Demi}: Once the home of the now-humble de
Lomagne family, Milon's End is a keep built more than a century ago by
the family's founder, Itier de Lomagne. He raised it to guard over the
Deep where he acquired his fortune but his grandson Milon later vanished
below in a vain effort to revive the family's dwindling wealth. The
gobelin plague of 943 AL drove the surviving family to Castelnou, and
now the keep's ruins stand a lonely sentinel over the perilous depths
below.

[Mines of Ebratz]{.Futura-PT-Demi}: A rich delve of silver and gold in
the days of the Second Establishment, the mine was lost to pagan raiders
not long before the Green Death extinguished the old baronnie. The
pagans held it for centuries, raising many hideous shrines within its
depths, but these days even they seem to fear the place. Adventurers who
dare its carved passages speak of things coming up that should have
remained below.

[Montfroid]{.Futura-PT-Demi}: Greatest and most splendid of the
monasteries of Montfroid, its high spires were built atop an ancient
ruin that predated even the Confederacy. Wondrous treasures were found
in the cleared debris but the perpetual winter that shrouds the place
discouraged all but the hardy monks from taking residence. The creatures
that took residence there after the downfall of the Second Establishment
have since discouraged all efforts to reclaim the place.

[Sent Gastos]{.Futura-PT-Demi}: Founded in ancient days, Sent Gastos was
established by monks from Lucatz in a dispute over some long-forgotten
point of theology. While it was an abandoned ruin by the end of the
First Establishment, it still bears an evil reputation. Scholars say
that the schismatics sought forbidden secrets and conducted unholy rites
in pursuit of their ends. It is thought that the stain of those rituals
remains, as do the devils that they called up.

[Sent Milos]{.Futura-PT-Demi}: A ruin of the First Establishment, Sent
Milos was once a nunnery for the nobility of Montfroid, where excess
daughters could be granted a dignified retreat from the demands of
courtly life. Its view over Lac Ain is magnificent, and the remnants of
its apple orchard spread for a mile around the broken monastery walls.
Raftmen coming down from the hills on the Valence prefer to pole clear
from it, however, for some manner of lake-creatures now dwell within its
halls, and they do not care for humans.

[Sentlir]{.Futura-PT-Demi}: The former capital of the Baronnie of
Montfroid during the Second Establishment, Sentlir was a town destroyed
not by war, but by plague. Its roofless houses and sagging keep are now
inhabited only by angry ghosts and the shambling, plant-wrapped bones of
those who died of the Green Death. Its grimacing fortifications command
the western end of Lac Capelan, making river trade on the Arve
impossible.

[Vilamur]{.Futura-PT-Demi}: Once the linchpin of Montfroid's eastern
defenses during the First Establishment, Vilamur was a proud keep raised
to house the brave knights of Regandi who sought to defend against
pagans and Blighted from over the hills. Now the villages of Lebret and
La Parra serve those ends, and there are not spears enough to garrison
Vilamur's crumbling walls. Most people say it has become a nest of
heretics who survive with secret support from allies in Lebret; others
say they are merely poor men and women who seek safety where they can.

[]{#Diocesi_de_Montfroid_PDF.xhtml#_idTextAnchor004}Wayhouses

The wayhouses of Montfroid are a necessity for travelers, few of whom
are bold enough to make camp in the wilderness. Most are sturdy timber
structures and their adjoining stables, with a tall wooden palisade to
keep back casual raiders. They are not suited to withstanding strong
assaults, but they are usually close enough to reinforcements to summon
them with a beacon-fire if necessary. The master of a wayhouse is its
law, and those who make trouble risk being thrown out into the hungry
night to fend for themselves.

[Ainbridge]{.Futura-PT-Demi}: Established by the bridge crossing just
west of Lac Ain, Ainbridge's master Henri is a lean, laconic man with
little patience for anything but business. He has been troubled by the
steady encroachment of the lake-devils of Sent Milos, however, and fears
they may seek to pillage his wayhouse before long.

[Capelan's Rest]{.Futura-PT-Demi}: Set up on the shores of Lac Capelan,
the Rest provides a safe roof for carters on the road between Rossilhon
and Castelnou. Its mistress Louisa is known for her immorality, however,
and many say that her serving-girls and stableboys are party to greater
crimes than mere whoring or petty theft. Bandits have been known to stay
at the Rest if their money is good.

[Mother Alba's House]{.Futura-PT-Demi}: Located seven miles south of
Castelnou, a bowshot from the Bosc Rimasser's edge, Mother Alba's
wayhouse is a shelter for many lumberjacks, hunters, and
charcoal-burners who can't reach the safety of Castelnou before dark.
More than a few of them are bandits by convenience as well, but Mother
Alba cares little so long as they behave themselves within the palisade.

[The High House]{.Futura-PT-Demi}: Raised on a small hillock that gives
a good view of the road north and south, the High House is a common
refuge for adventurers exploring the Gobelin Woods. Its master Brandoc
is a famed archer, and he and his retainers have driven off more than
one pack of gobelin raiders who sought to pillage the wayhouse's
stables.

[The Twice-Burnt Tavern]{.Futura-PT-Demi}: Guarded by a strong palisade,
the tavern is a welcome respite for travelers on the trade road through
the Bosc de Rossil. Fat Wilhelm the publican is a foreign mercenary who
took over the place after its second burning by a pagan warband. His
thinly-disguised bigamy with his wife and her two "sisters" has given
him eight strong sons to help guard the place, despite the abadesse of
Rossilhon's disapproval. It's his twelve beautiful daughters than
trouble him, however, and he is anxious to see the older ones wedded off
to worthy suitors.

The Lands Beyond

The affairs of foreign countries are of little concern to most in
Montfroid; their crowns are distant, while the gobelins are close at
hand. Even so, two lands send enough strangers to Castelnou to bear
special mention.

[The Amundi Kingdoms]{.Futura-PT-Demi}: Many strangers come up from the
lands of old Amund in the south, crossing the Hammersea from the
ramshackle port of Kennet in Fidach. Such is the riot of cultures in the
south that almost any sort of freebooter might step off a Fidachan
trader's deck, usually knowing little more of Montfroid than a taciturn
Marchen captain might have mentioned. Such strangers often mean trouble
to the Montfroiders, and they are viewed warily, but even trouble has
its uses when aimed in the right direction.

[The Black Pact]{.Futura-PT-Demi}: A wizard-cursed land where the
commoners cower beneath their sorcerous master, the Black Pact has been
an old peril to all of Couront. The monstrous cast-offs of the
experiments stalk the northern woodlands, and their witchsailed ships
pirate along the Hammersea coast. Some common Pacters are desperate
enough to flee their land, however, and provided they accept the true
faith and abjure the diabolical ways of their masters they can find a
new home in Couront. Their wizards are less welcome; after the Green
Death, it's worth a Pacter sorcerer's life to be caught in Montfroid.
:::

::: {#Diocesi_de_Montfroid_PDF.xhtml#_idContainer024 .Basic-Text-Frame}
  Community                                   Pop.                         Leader          Militia Capitani            General Repute
  ------------------------------------------- ---------------------------- --------------- --------------------------- ----------------------------------------------------------------
  Castelnou                                   1,810                        Videm Odo       Sieur Arnaud (5th lvl)      [Chief port and capital of the diocesi]{.CharOverride-3}
  Malvezi                                     711                          Barona Sancha   Sieur Milos (4th lvl)       [Smuggler-favored, with scheming rulers]{.CharOverride-3}
  Nouvila                                     655                          Baron Sicard    Sieur Bertrans (3rd lvl)    [Rich farmland often threatened by war]{.CharOverride-3}
  Rossilhon                                   508                          Videm Contet    Otz the Merry (3rd lvl)     [Once an important trade hub in the east]{.CharOverride-3}
  La Parra                                    499                          Sieur Raimond   "Bloody" Bartas (5th lvl)   [Rough backwater of violent hillfolk miners]{.CharOverride-3}
  Frivet                                      489                          Videm Solais    Lamberts (3rd lvl)          [Lumber-town and village of crafters]{.CharOverride-3}
  Lebret                                      451                          Videm Charay    Sieur Aimeric (3rd lvl)     [Eastern garrison-village of uncertain faith]{.CharOverride-3}
  Boclo                                       422                          Videm Serras    Louisa the Grim (4th lvl)   [Dubious recluses suspected of Fae ties]{.CharOverride-3}
  [Extramural Inhabitants]{.CharOverride-3}   \~300                        \-              \-                          [Bandits, hermits, madmen, and wanderers]{.CharOverride-3}
  [Total]{.CharOverride-4}                    [\~5,845]{.CharOverride-4}                                               
:::

::: _idGenObjectLayout-1
::: {#Diocesi_de_Montfroid_PDF.xhtml#_idContainer025}
![](image/Diocesi_de_Montfroid.jpg){._idGenObjectAttribute-1
role="presentation"}
:::
:::

::: {#Diocesi_de_Montfroid_PDF.xhtml#_idContainer026 .Sidebar-Single-Column}
[Seafaring in Montfroid]{.CharOverride-5}

[Montfroiders keep only small fishing boats, and seldom leave sight of
shore. The Hammersea is rife with terrible monsters, and only the
canniest smugglers or the witch-blessed corsairs of the Black Pact can
safely cross its depths.]{.CharOverride-1}

[PCs who want to visit these islands will generally need to hire a boat
at Malvezi or Castelnou, and can expect to pay at least 50 silver a day
in advance. Boats are seldom for sale, and building a new fishing boat
might take a season and 250 sp.]{.CharOverride-1}

[Both Malvezi and Castelnou are wary of raids by Black Pact pirates or
sea monster incursions. It's not unknown for the former to make landfall
on the coast and ambush caravans, taking loot and flesh for their
altars.]{.CharOverride-1}

[Ships from Auvergne come once or twice a season, except during the
fierce autumn gales. These big merchantmen are armed for trouble and
guard their departure times carefully, but every so often a Pact spy
learns enough to let them be intercepted by raiders.]{.CharOverride-1}
:::

::: _idGenObjectLayout-1
::: {#Diocesi_de_Montfroid_PDF.xhtml#_idContainer027}
![](image/Angelinthequietprimevalforestdigitalpainting..png){._idGenObjectAttribute-1
role="presentation"}
:::
:::

::: _idGenObjectLayout-1
::: {#Diocesi_de_Montfroid_PDF.xhtml#_idContainer028}
![](image/Couront_Inset_Location_Final.jpg){._idGenObjectAttribute-1
role="presentation"}
:::
:::

::: {#Diocesi_de_Montfroid_PDF.xhtml#_idContainer029 .Two-Column-Text}
GM Tools and Tables

The tables and descriptions in this section of the book are meant to
provide helps for GMs in framing adventures, generating local events,
and handling the depredations of careless PCs. With these tools, the GM
can pick a starting village, provide a selection of potential hirelings,
and staff their adventures with suitable locals.

Those in need of playable content for their Montfroid campaign can turn
forward to Milon's End, a complete four-level Deep suitable for blooding
novice adventurers.

The table below provides suggestions for monthly events in Montfroid,
some of which may be susceptible to PC involvement or provide
opportunities for profit. The easiest way to use them is to roll up a
event, personalize it with any necessary names or commonly-known
details, and then tell the players about the local news at the end of a
gaming session. If they decide to get involved with the event, you'll
have the downtime between sessions to flesh out the incident into
something playable at the table.
:::

::: {#Diocesi_de_Montfroid_PDF.xhtml#_idContainer030 .Basic-Text-Frame}
  d6    d10   Recent Events in Montfroid
  ----- ----- --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  1-2   1     A village's ruler has grown gravely ill, and all eyes are turning to their heirs.
        2     Pagans launched a fierce raid at a village, killing several residents caught outside the walls.
        3     A villager was accused of being a loup-garou; the trial is set for after the Eveque-Abat's investigator arrives.
        4     A band of foreign adventurers has turned bandit after offending the locals with their savage ways.
        5     A spell of vicious, unseasonable weather is making travel between villages perilous or difficult.
        6     People say that a fae knight and his wolf-rider retinue are riding near the village, seeking some hidden end.
        7     A village churchbell has cracked, and the bellfounders in Castelnou are rushing to pour a replacement.
        8     A blight is wilting the crops or plaguing the cattle, and folk fear a hungry season soon.
        9     A new joglar has come up from Auvergne bringing new chansons; all are eager to hear them.
        10    A village ruler's storehouses were recently plundered by bandits. They are anxious to recover their lost silver.
  3-4   1     A heretical preacher in the woods is gathering followers among lumberjacks and charcoal-burners.
        2     An abat has died suddenly, and people murmur that it was poison. All his proposed successors are suspicious.
        3     A foreign scholar is staying in Castelnou, and people say that he has great powers of sorcery.
        4     Smugglers quarreled among themselves off the coast, and their rich cargo was scattered among the beaches.
        5     A plague has sprung up in a village. They desperately need medicines, but all trade is cut off until it is over.
        6     Miners in La Parra have struck a lode of silver, bringing countless eager fortune-seekers from the other villages.
        7     There is to be a tournament this month at Castelnou for archers, lancers, and warriors both common and gentle.
        8     A ruler's heir has perished battling pagans or gobelins. The ruler is anxious to recover their body or equipage.
        9     A foreign merchant has set up in Castelnou, throwing much silver around and harshly pressing the local traders.
        10    A demagogue in Castelnou is rallying malcontents to establish a new village, to be ruled in some better way.
  5-6   1     A ruler has been struck down by a sickness or palsy, unable to do their duty. Their viceroy now rules for a time.
        2     An important caravan of goods was seized by pagans or bandits. It must be recovered quickly.
        3     A quarrel has arisen between two villages, and they refuse to trade with each other. Some want open fighting.
        4     A village ruler is recruiting a personal guard of foreigners that looks suspiciously like a private army.
        5     A clan feud has been sparked in a village and it's rapidly spiraling into a Riu frenzy of dramatic excess.
        6     A fresh Deep has been uncovered, and bands of local freebooters are already forming up to explore it.
        7     A troubadour has sent out a call for inspiration; brave souls vie to do deeds that will be worthy of his chansons.
        8     A small band of pagans seeks refuge and ostensible conversion in a village; opinion is strongly against them.
        9     A rich foreigner seeks residence in a village for some hidden end; he brings silver and earns suspicion.
        10    A wayhouse is raided by gobelins or pagans and only barely holds out, with several prisoners stolen away.
:::

::: {#Diocesi_de_Montfroid_PDF.xhtml#_idContainer031 .Two-Column-Text}
Names in Montfroid

Local names are derived from Court Riu for the most part, with a few
Modern Riu names from southern immigrants. There are a handful of
foreign names passed down through the bloodlines of freebooters, trade
ship castoffs, and lost mercenaries, so it would not be too remarkable
for a person to bear a more unusual appellation.

Courontine names are in given name-family name order, infants christened
around their thirtieth day of life with their "name in the faith". Most
names honor particular heroes, saints, or ancestors of importance to the
family. By custom, a family ally or important relative will stand as
godparent to the infant and take responsibility for their religious
instruction. Their help often extends to less theological matters later
in life.

While christening records will note down a Montfroider's full name,
commoners are known more often by a short epithet related to their
profession or personal characteristics. Thus, Duran Brau is more likely
to be called Duran the Tailor or Limping Duran by his neighbors.

Husbands and wives usually keep their own family names, though commoners
who wed into nobility will usually take their spouse's family name. The
children of a couple will bear their father's family name, if he is
known, though custom encourages ensuring that at least one child carries
on the name of their mother's lineage. This tradition has long been a
refuge for illegitimate children, who can go by their mother's name
without drawing too many questions from strangers.
:::

::: {#Diocesi_de_Montfroid_PDF.xhtml#_idContainer032 .Basic-Text-Frame}
  d6    d10   Male Given   Female Given   Family       Places         More Places
  ----- ----- ------------ -------------- ------------ -------------- -------------
  1-2   1     Adhemar      Agnes          Affaros      Auzits         Alfar
        2     Almaric      Aicelina       Alaman       Carlot         Algais
        3     Arnal        Alamanda       Aldebal      Cayro          Anonnay
        4     Arnald       Andreva        Bandeli      Condat         Balencs
        5     Bec          Astruga        Barbier      Cros           Bidacha
        6     Berengar     Aymeriga       Bocart       Fontencha      Breil
        7     Bernat       Beatrisia      Bournazels   Fraysse        Brezi
        8     Bertran      Berengaria     Bozesa       Gualhac        Cabaretz
        9     Deodat       Biatris        Brau         La Fon         Castelnou
        10    Duran        Brunissende    Caissac      La Parra       Charra
  3-4   1     Estol        Cambola        Camboulas    Limayrac       Cusset
        2     Fontanier    Constansa      Campanhac    Manso          Escorralha
        3     Galhart      Catorna        Canac        Mauro          Espaza
        4     Gerald       Ciragua        Charay       Mayres         Gueret
        5     Grigori      Favia          Contet       Moncado        Juratz
        6     Gui          Fina           Ebrart       Monmato        La Mota
        7     Guilhem      Guilberta      Engels       Navarra        Lambesc
        8     Guiral       Guiralda       Fabre        Penavayra      Lhivro
        9     Helias       Helena         Gasc         Pessolis       Lomanha
        10    Huc          Helis          Mansaga      Petra          Montbron
  5-6   1     Johan        Henrietta      Marro        Peyrasmortas   Mozencs
        2     Jorda        Isabella       Martel       Pineto         Olitz
        3     Marot        Marguarida     Montes       Podeo          Porcelens
        4     Miquel       Petronilla     Payra        Scoralha       Riberac
        5     Odo          Ramunda        Pontier      Segur          Saissi
        6     Peyre        Rixenda        Roquier      Sortiz         Seguret
        7     Phelip       Rubea          Samoral      Terralh        Sent Beat
        8     Ramon        Sebienda       Segui        Verdier        Sent Just
        9     Sicart       Seguina        Teldes       Vernholes      Sent Marti
        10    Simos        Sobeyrana      Valeta       Veyrac         Vezis
:::

::: {#Diocesi_de_Montfroid_PDF.xhtml#_idContainer033 .Basic-Text-Frame}

Faces of Montfroid

Even the most thoroughly documented adventure can't note down every
potentially-necessary NPC. Sometimes a GM will need to conjure up a
local on short notice to fill some requirement or respond to a PC plan,
and it can be inconvenient to have to generate them out of thin air.

The tables on these two pages provide thumbnails for a number of filler
NPCs. They're designed to fit in any of the villages, though the details
of their activities might change a bit to fit the specific locale in
which they're found. Most are relatively minor figures in their
communities, though some are significant enough to be good help to
friendly PCs, or hazards to less diplomatic ones.

In the case that combat statistics are needed for an NPC, you can lift
an appropriate stat line from the examples on [page
41](#Diocesi_de_Montfroid_PDF.xhtml#_idTextAnchor006). The common folk
of Montfroid are not all warriors, but few are entirely incapable of
self-defense. They live too close to Fae and pagans to ever be entirely
heedless of danger.

If you do use one of these NPCs, make sure to note it down in your GM
notes to prevent accidental recycling the next time you need a similar
stand-in. Even so, it might be useful to have them show up somewhere
else in the diocesi as a callback to prior encounters, giving the
players a chance to form a more personal familiarity with them.

  Demimonde and Criminals                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      
  --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ---------------------------- ------------------------- --------------------------------------------------------------
  [NPC]{.CharOverride-4}                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                [Sex/Age]{.CharOverride-4}   [Role]{.CharOverride-4}   [Desires]{.CharOverride-4}
  Favia Monmato                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         F/22                         Harlot                    Find a husband and security before her looks fade.
  A whore's daughter raised in hardship, all expected her to do as her mother did, so she does. Despite her beauty, she knows no man she'd want is apt to wed her without great inducement, so she is eager to find some way to leverage a suitor's interest.                                                                  
  Johan Montes                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          M/25                         Joglar                    Be taken in as herald or family bard by a wealthy patron
  A former bandit who forswore his ways when defeated by the troubadour Bertran de Foish, he took service with a village joglar until last winter. While he is a profoundly mediocre joglar, he's an expert stalker and forest sniper.                                                                                         
  Petra Scoralha                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        F/33                         "Healer"                  Assist annoyed wives in being rid of their husbands
  A well-preserved, childless woman recently bereaved of her third husband. She brews and distills for her daily bread, but her skill with cures and remedies is famed in the village. Others know that she sells more than cures to those who seem in need.                                                                   
  Miquel Verdier                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        M/32                         Thief                     Rob the Eveque-Abat in some magnificent way
  Miquel is a slight wisp of a man, long-fingered and smiling. He works as a carter, but wherever he goes he finds a way to lift a little something unseen. He fancies himself a grand thief, and is prone to plotting heists that only lack associates to carry out.                                                          
  Paire Phelip Samoral                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  M/25                         Priest/Assassin           Shed blood for the glory of God
  A thin and bookish young capelan who assists the local priest, but trained extensively by the Wounds of God. He is secretly convinced that all are fit only for death, and to kill is to honor God's justice. He donates his murder fees to the poor.                                                                        
  Seguina Roquier                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       F/48                         Procuress                 Marry her son Guilbert into a respectable family
  A loud, blowsy barmaid who traffics with adventurers and travelers, connecting them with local wantons or rogues as their needs require. She has but one son, a carter, and racks her brains to find a way to get him married despite her infamy.                                                                            
  Marot the Usurer                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      M/47                         Info Broker               Force Sieur Raimond de la Parra to repay a long-ignored debt
  Fat, sullen, and unpersonable, Marot is a moneylender who has cultivated a wide web of informants in exchange for his forbearance about their loan repayment. He trades information for silver or for help in "persuading" others to repay him.                                                                              
:::

::: _idGenObjectLayout-1
::: {#Diocesi_de_Montfroid_PDF.xhtml#_idContainer034}
![](image/facesofcouront.png){._idGenObjectAttribute-1
role="presentation"}
:::
:::

::: {#Diocesi_de_Montfroid_PDF.xhtml#_idContainer035 .Basic-Text-Frame}
  Merchants and Artisans                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                
  -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ---------------------------- ------------------------- ----------------------------------------------------------------
  [NPC]{.CharOverride-4}                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         [Sex/Age]{.CharOverride-4}   [Role]{.CharOverride-4}   [Desires]{.CharOverride-4}
  Deodat La Fon                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  M/25                         Blacksmith                Get a noble or hero to use one of his blades in a grand battle
  Broad-shouldered and squinting, Deodat's chief work is in horseshoes, plows, pots, and other mundane needs. He forges blades whenever he is able, however, and his work is surprisingly good. He desires fame for it, though it eludes him.                                                                           
  Petronilla Monmato                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             F/31                         Vendor                    Hear juicy gossip about her neighbors or recent events
  A leather-lunged woman with a voice like a storm, she cries her wares on market days. Sometimes food, sometimes weaving, sometimes whatever she can find to trade. She keeps an ear open at all times and is eager to share what she hears.                                                                           
  Louis Pontier                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  M/41                         Tinker                    Make the acquaintance of bored or lonely wives
  A wandering tinker with a quick step and a pack full of useful wares, Louis walks the roads of Montfroid during the warmer seasons and holes up in Castelnou in winter. He pacifies highwaymen with fixes and repairs, and has sociable ties with many.                                                               
  Marguarida Fraysse                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             F/18                         Painter                   Paint Deeps, ruins, and other places in the far wilds
  Daughter of a prosperous farmer, she's a spirited young blonde with perpetually paint-smudged cheeks. She loves to do landscapes and still lifes, often with a harrowing neglect of her surroundings. Her father sometimes hires escorts for her.                                                                     
  Adhemar Bandeli                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                M/55                         Carpenter                 Get enough silver to dower his pious daughter to a nunnery
  Tall, lean, and rough-handed, Adhemar is a superb woodworker with a decidedly artistic bent. A man of great piety, he constantly invokes God in his speech and often works religious motifs into his craft.                                                                                                           
  Astruga Bozesa                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 F/46                         Silversmith               Avenge herself on a thief who recently plundered her shop
  Hard-eyed and clever-fingered, Astruga acts as a moneylender and banker for her poorer neighbors, renting them space in her well-locked vault room. A thief recently looted it, however, and she is desperate to get the pelf back before it's discovered.                                                            
  Jerome Canac                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   M/71                         Antique Dealer            "Acquire" a priceless piece from Barona Sancha's keep
  Ascetical, with pale blue eyes and snowy hair, Jerome knows no pleasure but the collection of Confederate relics and Courontine antiquities, which he finances by trading in lesser pieces. He will buy them readily, but steal them if he can do it neatly.                                                          
:::

::: {#Diocesi_de_Montfroid_PDF.xhtml#_idContainer036 .Basic-Text-Frame}
  Peasants and Clerics                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
  ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ---------------------------- ------------------------- -------------------------------------------------------
  [NPC]{.CharOverride-4}                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        [Sex/Age]{.CharOverride-4}   [Role]{.CharOverride-4}   [Desires]{.CharOverride-4}
  Sorre Johanna                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 F/22                         Nun                       Escape the nunnery without humiliating her parents
  A plain-faced, unpleasant woman, her parents consigned her to a nearby nunnery as they couldn't afford the dowry she'd need to entice a husband. While aggravating, Johanna is a gifted archer; she wants a dignified out that won't cause scandal.                                                                  
  Umberto Fontencha                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             M/33                         Farmer                    Acquire a neighbor's prize cow
  A sour and squinting farmer more interested in his dairy cows than his family. He's convinced his neighbor owes him his best-blooded milker after winning a drunken bet, but the man refuses to give her over. Umberto does not intend to leave it be.                                                               
  Fontanier Mansaga                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             M/25                         Lumberjack                Satisfy his numerous appetites in a direct fashion
  A giant of a man with a bristling blond beard, Fontanier is simple in his desires but very sharp in his perceptions. He sees much in the forest and remembers what he sees; he'll share his knowledge with those who feed his appetite for booze and women.                                                          
  Frera Lir                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     M/77                         Monk                      Patch up local quarrels among the monks and laity
  White-bearded Lir commands respect second only to the abat for his age and good sense, having led a life of simple piety and practical labor. He wants little more from his remaining days than a peaceful home and untroubled prayer.                                                                               
  Paire Rabelais                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                M/33                         Priest                    Win donations to the local church for its good causes
  A capelan charged with assisting the local church's priest, Rabelais has never risen far in the Church due to his inability to speak three sentences without at least two obscenities. He has made the habit an advantage in dunning parishioners for aid.                                                           
  Meliora Podeo                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 F/18                         Daughter                  Take over-eager paramours for all they're worth
  The very picture of a buxom blonde farmgirl, Meliora plays up her seemingly innocent gullibility to cozen gifts and attention out of men. Training by a monastic uncle has left her an excellent unarmed combatant, if perhaps overconfident.                                                                        
  Widow Cambola                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 F/29                         Farmwife                  Find extra hands to keep up the farm
  Recently widowed by a bad fever season, Cambola struggles to maintain the farm with four young children and a half-hearted nephew's help. Still too sore-hearted to seek another husband, she also lacks silver to hire good farmhands.                                                                              
:::

::: {#Diocesi_de_Montfroid_PDF.xhtml#_idContainer037 .Two-Column-Text}
[]{#Diocesi_de_Montfroid_PDF.xhtml#_idTextAnchor005}Adventuring
Hirelings

Spare hands for adventuring can sometimes be hired in the town of
Castelnou or other villages of Montfroid. The table below provides a
list of pre-made possibilities, and 1d4-1 of them will be willing to
work at any one time. Other semi-desperate locals might be willing to
hire on as well, though seldom any NPC with more than 1 or 2 hit dice.

The hirelings below come with their listed basic armor and weapons,
along with the common gear of their profession. They'll gladly accept
better equipment from their employers, and will probably spend at least
some of their first share of booty on getting it if it's not given to
them.

As NPCs, hirelings have statistics as per monsters or other non-PC
entities, and don't use the same class and level system as PCs do. The
candidates below sometimes have a few AC, damage, or skill bumps to
reflect exceptionally quick, strong, or skillful hirelings.

Most hirelings will never advance in ability, as they lack the talent to
do so. In a pinch, however, a player with a dead PC might be allowed to
take one over and remake them as a PC of the appropriate level when
there's time to do so

Hireling Pay and Morale

Most hireling candidates are desperate enough to hire on without
up-front payment, though they'll expect food and shelter while employed,
along with basic medical care and necessities.

Hirelings normally insist on a full share of treasure from an adventure,
to be paid once back in civilization. Most will promptly spend the money
on carousing, personal goals, or new gear, or else give it to family and
friends.

Hirelings will usually obey any reasonable order and will deal with the
risks of adventuring as their courage allows. They won't perform
suicidal tasks, act as guinea pigs, or take risks that the PCs haven't
taken first.

If forced into an extremely dangerous situation a Morale check may be
required with a bonus of the best Lead skill in the party. A penalty of
-1 to -3 is usually also applied based on the peril of the circumstance.
Failure means flight.

After a botched adventure or one in which they almost died, a hireling
needs to make a Morale check modified as above. On a failure, they give
up the adventuring life or refuse to work for the PCs again, barring
extreme inducements.
:::

::: {#Diocesi_de_Montfroid_PDF.xhtml#_idContainer038 .Basic-Text-Frame}
  [d12]{.CharOverride-4}                                                                                                    [Name, Sex, and Age]{.CharOverride-4}         [HD/HP]{.CharOverride-4}   [AC]{.CharOverride-4}   [Atk]{.CharOverride-4}   [Dmg]{.CharOverride-4}   [Shock]{.CharOverride-4}   [ML]{.CharOverride-4}   [Skill]{.CharOverride-4}   [Save]{.CharOverride-4}
  ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- --------------------------------------------- -------------------------- ----------------------- ------------------------ ------------------------ -------------------------- ----------------------- -------------------------- -------------------------
  1                                                                                                                         [Jean Valmort ]{.CharOverride-4}(M/42)        2/12 hp                    14 (Pieced/Shield)      +3                       1d6+1 Mace               2/AC 18                    10                      +1                         14+
  A new grandfather frustrated at years of training militia; he wants do something big to make his grandson proud of him                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
  2                                                                                                                         [Clarisse Beaumont ]{.CharOverride-4}(F/18)   1/5 hp                     13 (Buff Coat)          +2                       1d6+1 Shortswd           3/AC 15                    8                       +2                         15+
  Newly-graduated joglaressa; beautiful, ambitious, and eager to make tales of herself as a fearless wanderer                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                
  3                                                                                                                         [Agnes Marro ]{.CharOverride-4}(F/28)         1/8 hp                     13 (Buff Coat)          +2                       1d8+1 L. Bow             \-                         9                       +2                         15+
  Rude, socially-inept huntress who feels old and lonely; just wants human company that will tolerate her                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
  4                                                                                                                         [Bad Grigori ]{.CharOverride-4}(M/19)         1/4 hp                     13 (Buff Coat)          +2                       1d4+1 Stiletto           2/AC 18                    9                       +2                         15+
  Ex tailor-prentice; Good with locks, bad with impulse control. Wants to be a rogueish hero and not the town sneak-thief                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
  5                                                                                                                         [Marot Payra ]{.CharOverride-4}(M/31)         1/8 hp                     15 (Pieced/Shield)      +2                       1d8+1 Warhmmr            2/AC 18                    9                       +1                         15+
  Widowered blacksmith; Has ten young children and a failing business, needs money badly                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
  6                                                                                                                         [Galhart the Fat ]{.CharOverride-4}(M/30)     2/9 hp                     12 (Buff Coat)          +3                       1d10+2 Grtclub           4/AC 15                    11                      +1                         14+
  Cheerful ox-strong farmhand with near-limitless thirst for drink and minimal awareness of danger                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           
  7                                                                                                                         [Brother Luc ]{.CharOverride-4}(M/27)         1/5 hp                     11 (Robe)               +2                       1d6+1 Qtrstaff           2/AC 13                    8                       +1                         15+
  Defrocked monk with a weakness for women; Always seeking money to blandish a new lady-love                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
  8                                                                                                                         [Heinrich Stern ]{.CharOverride-4}(M/22)      2/10 hp                    14 (Pieced Armr)        +3                       1d10+1 War Ax            4/AC 15                    9                       +1                         14+
  Southern mercenary; his Court Riu is mostly obscenities. Wants to earn fame to get a militia captaincy                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
  9                                                                                                                         [Ramunda the Lame ]{.CharOverride-4}(F/18)    2/8 hp                     15 (Linothrx)           +3                       1d6+2 L. Spear           4/AC 13                    11                      +2                         14+
  Seamstress who won every village race except the one she threw to her sweetheart; gobelins killed him last winter                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          
  10                                                                                                                        [Mistress Helena ]{.CharOverride-4}(F/29)     1/4 hp                     10 (Robes)              +0                       1d4 Dagger               1/AC 15                    9                       +2                         15+
  Herbalist-scholar, can cast as a 1st level High Mage with 1d4 known spells. Wants to prove she's not a diabolist.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          
  11                                                                                                                        [Biatris Segur ]{.CharOverride-4}(F/33)       1/6 hp                     14 (Pieced Armr)        +2                       1d10+1 Xbow              \-                         8                       +1                         15+
  Ex-farmwife, ex-harlot, ex-bandit; wants to make a big score and retire to open a brothel in Castelnou                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
  12                                                                                                                        [Black Huc ]{.CharOverride-4}(M/29)           1/7 hp                     13 (Buff/Shield)        +2                       1d6+1 H. Axe             2/AC 15                    9                       +2                         15+
  Charcoal burner; Knows much of the forest and wants to get rich enough to never enter it again                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             
:::

::: {#Diocesi_de_Montfroid_PDF.xhtml#_idContainer039 ._idGenObjectStyleOverride-1}
Hireling One-Roll Table

If you need to generate more hirelings, you can use the tables below.
Just pick up one die of each type, roll them all at once, and read from
the results below, tweaking things as necessary. If you want a hireling
with both positive and negative traits, you can roll 1d10 on the quirk
table for a positive quality and 1d10+10 for a negative one.

Once you've rolled the hireling, use the name tables on [page
41](#Diocesi_de_Montfroid_PDF.xhtml#_idTextAnchor006) to name them, give
them the closest-fitting stat line from the hireling table opposite, and
you're done. You might adjust the stat line slightly to fit your idea of
the NPC.

Remember that people with prospects usually don't become adventurers.
Only the desperate, the foolish, and the damaged are likely to show up
as hireling candidates, and usually for some pressing reason. Sometimes
these reasons can come back to bite an unwary employer.
:::

::: {#Diocesi_de_Montfroid_PDF.xhtml#_idContainer040 .Basic-Text-Frame}
  d6   How Do They Fight?
  ---- --------------------------------------------------------
  1    Terribly; their talents don't lie in martial aptitude.
  2    With weapons close to their professional tools
  3    They use a bow or crossbow by choice
  4    They favor simple peasant or militia weapons
  5    They have a sword or other martial implement
  6    They have some large or unusual weapon
:::

::: {#Diocesi_de_Montfroid_PDF.xhtml#_idContainer041 .Basic-Text-Frame}
  d8   What Other Talent Do They Have?
  ---- -------------------------------------------------
  1    Very sharp senses, hard to ambush or surprise
  2    Blind luck that gives them a Save bonus
  3    They have numerous non-adventurer friends
  4    They're very hard to kill and have bonus HP
  5    They're unusually good at their trade
  6    Abnormally clear-headed in situations of danger
  7    A second profession before their current one
  8    A horse, war dog, or useful animal companion
:::

::: {#Diocesi_de_Montfroid_PDF.xhtml#_idContainer042 .Basic-Text-Frame}
  d10   Why Are They Doing This?
  ----- ---------------------------------------------------
  1     They're a criminal who needs to get out of town
  2     A family member needs money desperately
  3     They've failed utterly at their chosen profession
  4     They're an incorrigible adrenaline junkie
  5     They're emotionally damaged and need this life
  6     They crave wealth to escape their present poverty
  7     They want glory and the respect of their peers
  8     They want to impress a man or woman
  9     They want to gain power for the sake of revenge
  10    They're at rock bottom, having nowhere else to go
:::

::: {#Diocesi_de_Montfroid_PDF.xhtml#_idContainer043 .Basic-Text-Frame}
  d4   How Old is the Hireling?
  ---- -----------------------------------------------------
  1    Disturbingly young, barely old enough for their job
  2    Young, but with some years of experience
  3    In their prime with a career behind them
  4    Almost too old for this sort of thing
:::

::: {#Diocesi_de_Montfroid_PDF.xhtml#_idContainer044 .Basic-Text-Frame}
  d12   What Was Their Original Profession?
  ----- ------------------------------------------------
  1     Bandit, thug, or other strong-arm criminal
  2     Farmer or field hand
  3     Sailor, fisherman, or riverman
  4     Harlot, mistress, tavern wench, or entertainer
  5     Physician or surgeon, whether real or quack
  6     Hunter, trapper, or hermit
  7     Charcoal burner, lumberjack, or woodsman
  8     Peddler, shopkeeper, or small trader
  9     Pickpocket, con man, or petty thief
  10    Monk, nun, or likely-defrocked priest
  11    Militiaman, mercenary, or hired soldier
  12    Artisan, blacksmith, carpenter, or crafter
:::

::: {#Diocesi_de_Montfroid_PDF.xhtml#_idContainer045 .Basic-Text-Frame}
  d20   Particular Traits or Personality Quirks
  ----- ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  1     [Affable]{.Futura-PT-Demi-Oblique}, quick to make friends and socialize
  2     [Beautiful]{.Futura-PT-Demi-Oblique}, exceptionally fine to look at
  3     [Brave]{.Futura-PT-Demi-Oblique}, steady in the face of peril
  4     [Clever]{.Futura-PT-Demi-Oblique}, quick to see the solution to puzzles
  5     [Disciplined]{.Futura-PT-Demi-Oblique}, putting money or time to good use
  6     [Honest]{.Futura-PT-Demi-Oblique}, terrible at lying or deceit
  7     [Industrious]{.Futura-PT-Demi-Oblique}, always taking care of useful work
  8     [Powerful]{.Futura-PT-Demi-Oblique}, very strong or sturdy of form
  9     [Selfless]{.Futura-PT-Demi-Oblique}, willing to sacrifice for friends and allies
  10    [Thoughtful]{.Futura-PT-Demi-Oblique}, acting more out of reason than passion
  11    [Cowardly]{.Futura-PT-Demi-Oblique}, with lower Morale and quick to run
  12    [Deceitful]{.Futura-PT-Demi-Oblique}, preferring lies over truth
  13    [Feeble]{.Futura-PT-Demi-Oblique}, being unusually weak or frail
  14    [Greedy]{.Futura-PT-Demi-Oblique}, willing to steal from the party
  15    [Indulgent]{.Futura-PT-Demi-Oblique}, quick to gorge on pleasures
  16    [Lazy]{.Futura-PT-Demi-Oblique}, doing only what they absolutely must
  17    [Reckless]{.Futura-PT-Demi-Oblique}, prone to acting on first impulses
  18    [Stupid]{.Futura-PT-Demi-Oblique}, tending to act thoughtlessly by instinct
  19    [Ugly]{.Futura-PT-Demi-Oblique}, with some notable deformation
  20    [Unsociable]{.Futura-PT-Demi-Oblique}, bad at social interactions
:::

::: {#Diocesi_de_Montfroid_PDF.xhtml#_idContainer046 .Two-Column-Text}
The Villages of Montfroid

The following pages offer brief descriptions of each of the major
settlements of the diocesi. While they all have their individual traits,
each is a settlement of Courontines, and so they all share certain
qualities and habits. The sections below cover a few matters that are
likely to come up for many bands of reckless freebooters.

Entering and Leaving Villages

Village gates are open from dawn to dusk, with a handful of militia
standing watch and more within earshot. Entrance after dark is forbidden
without special permission from the village ruler or abat, but there's
usually a hut or two right outside the gate for unlucky strangers.
Climbing the village's wooden palisade is possible, but the night watch
in Montfroid is vigilant by necessity.

The Village Militia

Every village has a certain number of standing militia troops given
under the command of a capitani, with combat statistics given on [page
41](#Diocesi_de_Montfroid_PDF.xhtml#_idTextAnchor006). These are the
militia that can be summoned immediately to respond to disturbances.
Most of them are simply locals taking their turn in the duty rotation,
though a few are mercenaries or professionals.

Aside from these standing militia, a certain number of other locals are
fit to fight as well. All of them have militia equipment at home, though
it may take some time to properly muster them, and they cannot remain
mustered long without hindering the village business.

Of the rest, perhaps half are fit enough to fight in desperate straits
when the village must be defended from pagan raiders or monstrous
beasts. The rest of the inhabitants are too old, too young, or too frail
to be much practical use in war.

Crime and Troublemaking

When crime or disturbance occur in a village, the locals will set up a
hue and cry. The criminals usually have 1d6+4 rounds before a
prohibitive number of armed and able-bodied villagers come rushing to
the scene. Criminals will usually be non-violently subdued and dragged
to the bailiff.

Lethal resistance will be met with lethal force. The peasants of
Montfroid are well-drilled and familiar with danger, and can be expected
to react sensibly and with good coordination, particularly after the
nearest militia arrive.

Those guilty of minor crimes such as brawling, petty theft, disorderly
conduct, or the like will usually be given a sound beating by the
bailiff and released, losing half their current hit points. Serious
felonies such as murder, major thefts, assault with a weapon, or harm to
a cleric or noble will result in imprisonment until the local ruler can
pass judgment. Murder means the noose, but adventurers are usually
sentenced to painfully stiff fines or enforced service for lesser sins.

Repeat offenders can expect harsher punishment, starting with fines and
leading up to banishment from the village.

Trading in Loot and Gear

All villages have artisans or traders who can sell ordinary gear to
adventurers, including simple militia weaponry, light armor, and
ordinary delving equipment. Prices are as per the core rulebook. Some
villages have more versatile traders as given in their description, and
Castelnou offers traders for any weapon or gear worth 250 sp or less.

Selling adventuring loot such as gems, artwork, or obscure artifacts can
be more difficult. Certain NPCs are noted as buying and selling goods in
the village writeups. Aside from these individuals, the following
general guideline applies.

Castelnou merchants can buy up to 2,000 sp of loot per month, paying a
quarter of its base value. Other villages can buy half as much each
month. Getting a better price for loot requires doing favors for
merchants or finding specific buyers; such efforts might increase the
seller's share to 50%.

Magical items, spell grimoires, and other exotic goods are generally
unavailable, though some villages have individuals who might know more
than is proper for them to know.

The Hero's Largesse

The rulers of Montfroid expect, as a matter of courteous respect, to
share in significant finds and major hauls plundered from Deeps or ruins
in the diocesi. A brash freebooter can ignore this custom, but only at a
cost.

[Adventurers are expected to give over 10% of finds worth more than a
hundred pieces of silver the first time they enter a
village.]{.Bold-Italic ._idGenCharOverride-2} Usually it's paid to the
local ruler or abat, but selfless public charity is also considered
appropriate.

[If they refuse]{.Bold-Italic ._idGenCharOverride-2}, they're likely to
be mocked by joglars and suffer a -1 Reaction Roll penalty from
Montfroiders who hear of their unheroic tight-fistedness until they do
something suitably impressive and helpful to the locals.

[If they pay]{.Bold-Italic ._idGenCharOverride-2}, they get a +1
Reaction Roll bonus with the recipients of their largesse as long as
they continue to tithe at least semi-regularly. Minor crimes are likely
to be forgiven and minor favors extended to those who give much silver.

Residence and Buying Property

It's expected that adventurers and foreigners would have to lodge where
they can, so custom allows them to rent where they will within
Montfroid, provided they remain civil and useful to the locals.
Montfroiders, however, cannot easily move their residence to a different
village without marrying a local there or receiving permission from its
ruler or abat. Such permission usually requires that the candidate offer
some skill that their new home would need.

Adventurers who want to buy property within a village's palisade will
need to get the blessing of the ruler or the abat first. An adventurer
who has kept up with their largesse and caused no significant problems
can expect to be granted it, but those who have been less useful might
need to do some favors before being allowed to buy or build.
:::

::: {#Diocesi_de_Montfroid_PDF.xhtml#_idContainer047 .Two-Column-Text}
Boclo

Dark Boclo is the most remote village in Montfroid, crouched by the
chill waters of Lac Char. It is also one of the oldest settlements in
the diocesi, having been formed by refugees from the Green Death during
the Second Establishment. Its palisade is somewhat ragged and its church
not especially clean; neither matter seems to greatly trouble the
lakefishers and herb-gatherers of the hamlet.

Videm Odo sends an inspector to Boclo in spring and autumn to oversee
the collection of village taxes in medicinal compounds and dried fish.
The occasional bold merchant comes overland from Nouvila to trade
ironwares and other things the villagers cannot make, and sometimes
adventurers stay a while between ventures into the Deep of La Rais.
Aside from these strangers, few find much reason to visit Boclo and its
reclusive, close-mouthed folk.

Places of Importance

[Herbalist's House]{.Futura-PT-Demi}: Jeanette Montcalm is a slender
young woman of porcelain beauty and flaming locks. She is also a master
herbalist profoundly embittered against the videm. Formerly Serras'
lover and fellow pupil, she is convinced he poisoned a pox cure she made
for their master, the prior Morir videm, Martin. She will never forgive
him for it, though the videm maintains that it was merely her misfortune
that the patient died so gruesomely. She can compound one magical elixir
from the [Worlds Without Number]{.Italic ._idGenCharOverride-3} core
book with a creation cost of 250 sp or less every two weeks, and will do
so for twice the elixir's base cost.

[La Mota]{.Futura-PT-Demi}: Almost more a family concern than a
monastery, the stone walls of La Mota house 12 monks and their Abat
Tibaut. Both the abat and most of the monks are of the Morir clan and
tend to act as unofficial muscle for Videm Serras. They have little use
for pilgrims.

[Mad Henri's Shack]{.Futura-PT-Demi}: Cheerful and half-deranged, Henri
often picks up finds in the forest, scavenging the leavings of dead
travelers and unburied raiders. He has a 3 in 6 chance of having any
common piece of equipment in any given week, and will sell it for half
book price. Such finds have a 1 in 6 chance of failing or breaking when
first tested, however. He can buy up to 500 sp of loot per season if
it's sufficiently shiny or interesting to him, paying 50% of its value.

[The Newest Church]{.Futura-PT-Demi}: A timber chapel with a tarnished
churchbell salvaged from the collapse of the prior "new church" some
eighty years ago, Bocloers can be found there for Sunday services and
seldom at other times.

[The Stranger's House]{.Futura-PT-Demi}: A relic of Boclo's early days,
the stranger's house is a large stone building with more than a dozen
small rooms. Outsider are expected to remain there while in Boclo unless
their business requires otherwise. Old Marisa is supposedly the house's
caretaker, but she does little to hide her careful observation of
outsider doings.

[The Videm's Docks]{.Futura-PT-Demi}: A spiderweb of rickety wooden
docks and small fishing boats stretches out into Lac Char, just outside
the village's palisade. The appearance of occasional lake monsters
discourages locals from lingering after dark.

[Villa Morir]{.Futura-PT-Demi}: The clan hall of the Morir family and
the de facto seat of government in Boclo, Videm Serras is most often
found compounding strange medicines within this damp wooden manor. He
seldom has need to concern himself with official matters, and spends
most of his time experimenting. He is interested in buying arcane
objects, books, and other curiosities, paying full price for up to 1,500
silver pieces worth of loot each season. He can brew magical elixirs as
Jeanette Montcalm can, but will not do so without good reason.
:::

::: {#Diocesi_de_Montfroid_PDF.xhtml#_idContainer048 .Basic-Text-Frame}
  [Important Figure]{.CharOverride-4}                                                                                            [Sex/Age]{.CharOverride-4}   [Role]{.CharOverride-4}   [Desires]{.CharOverride-4}
  ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ ---------------------------- ------------------------- ---------------------------------------------------------------
  Videm Serras Morir                                                                                                             M/32                         Ruler                     Acquire fascinating new alchemical lore and materials
  Brilliant heir to medical arts passed down from Second Establishment physicians. Often drugged by his own experiments.                                                                
  Abat Tibaut                                                                                                                    M/55                         Abat                      Find out the truth about his brother Martin's death.
  The former Videm Martin's brother, skilled in both healing and poisons. Suspects Serras of having a hand in Martin's death.                                                           
  Jeanette Montcalm                                                                                                              F/28                         Bitter Herbalist          Prove that Martin tampered with the prior videm's medicine.
  Red-haired beauty who learned the chymical arts beside Serras at Videm Martin's knee. Hates with the heat of spoiled love.                                                            
  Louisa the Grim                                                                                                                F/23                         Militia Capitani          Deal with rumors that she's talebound as a villainous traitor
  A slim beauty of uninhibited violence. People whisper that she's talebound, fated to make herself a bloody villain in Boclo.                                                          
  Mad Henri                                                                                                                      M/41                         Scavenger                 Find lost "treasures" in the forest and lake
  Crooked from an old wound, Henri has an uncanny knack for finding lost objects and avoiding pagan raiders.                                                                            
  Paire Bocicault                                                                                                                M/33                         Village Priest            Keep Boclo safe from Fae and pagans
  Lean and fish-smelling, often on the lake. Some say that he talks to strangers on the far shore, not all of them human.                                                               
:::

::: {#Diocesi_de_Montfroid_PDF.xhtml#_idContainer049 .Basic-Text-Frame}
  ------------------------------- ---------------------------------------------
  [Ruler:]{.CharOverride-4}       Videm Serras Morir
  [Monastery:]{.CharOverride-4}   La Mota, led by Abat Tibaut
  [Garrison:]{.CharOverride-4}    12 troops led by Louisa the Grim
  [Economy:]{.CharOverride-4}     Fishing and herb-gathering
  [Populace:]{.CharOverride-4}    422, with 88 of them fit for militia muster
  ------------------------------- ---------------------------------------------
:::

::: {#Diocesi_de_Montfroid_PDF.xhtml#_idContainer050 .Two-Column-Text}
Castelnou

Capital of the diocesi and the only settlement that might qualify as a
true town, Castelnou is by far the largest and best-defended community
in Montfroid. Its walls are of cut stone, its militia are numerous, and
its citizens all proud of their great importance.

Most outsiders enter Montfroid through the Castelnou docks, and the
locals are more cosmopolitan in their outlook than the bulk of their
back-country peers. Outsiders can pass with far less notice than they
would in Frivet or Rossilhon, though exceptionally strange ones will
still bear remark. The locals are often eager to hire poor strangers to
do work that a native Montfroider would recognize as being more
dangerous than the pay is worth.

Places of Importance

[Abbey of Sent Miquel]{.Futura-PT-Demi}: Seat of the Eveque-Abat
himself, Sent Miquel is a stern and beautiful monastery that graces the
town with its bells at each canonical hour. Only clerics, pilgrims, and
petitioners are allowed within outside of the weekly services, though
the monastery has served as a refuge for the citizenry more than once
during harder times.

[Carrat Frossard]{.Futura-PT-Demi}: This square greets visitors from the
Solelh Gate, with a number of small vendors and artisans there to tend
to the wants of carters from Frivet or Malvezi. The guest-houses here
are accustomed to strangers from the docks as well, and their keepers
ask few questions.

[Carriera Lanterne]{.Futura-PT-Demi}: While Castelnou is too small to
have a real slum, this street has gathered to it what poverty exists. A
number of seedy drinking houses, a pawnshop, the tumbledown tenements of
drunkards and other misfits, and two brothels - one cheap, the other
dearer - line the way. If evil work is to be hired or offered, it is
most often done under the tallow lamps of the Hanged Pagan tavern or in
the gaudy rooms of Marie the Shepherdess' bagnio.

[Chateau Castelnou]{.Futura-PT-Demi}: Castle of the videms of Montfroid,
the chateau is high-walled and heavily fortified, with a score of
militia constantly on guard. A small dock below is reserved for boats on
private missions for the videm. In times of peril the entire town could
be sheltered between the castle and the abbey and hold out for more than
a month before provisions fail.

[Escola de Falcons]{.Futura-PT-Demi}: The sole intellectual institution
in Montfroid outside of the monasteries, the Escola has trained joglars
and scholars for generations. Only the most talented applicants are
accepted to its musical training; for scholars, the only requirement is
that they be rich enough to devote themselves to such unprofitable
idleness.

[Lanca Trencada Inn]{.Futura-PT-Demi}: Marked by a broken lance
supposedly shattered on a Fae lord's glass breastplate, the Lanca
Trencada caters mostly to the carters and traders that pass through the
Luna Gate to the east. The publican, Jules Landau, prides himself on
knowing half the carters in Montfroid by sight, and hearing all the
rumors they bring.

[Placa Marat]{.Futura-PT-Demi}: The grander plaza of Castelnou, the
shops that line the Placa Marat host the richer traders and more
successful artisans of the town. The pond at its south end is
spring-fed, with an aqueduct beneath the cobbles that spills its
overflow into the bay. Some say that the passages splitting off from the
sides of the aqueduct lead to more than the basements of Castelnou
houses.

[Solelh Gate]{.Futura-PT-Demi}: The western gate of Castelnou, just as
the eastern is the Luna Gate. The passage through its gatehouse is only
wide enough for one cart to pass, with arrow-holes on either side and a
stout portcullis at both ends to bolster the great iron-bound doors that
open each dawn. None may enter after nightfall, for fear they might be
Fae or worse.

[Talhaire Tavern]{.Futura-PT-Demi}: A carter's tavern catering to the
southern trade and the dock laborers, the Talhaire has a custom of the
"trifles market", a night where visitors trade oddities they have found.
The exchanges are always item for item, and never for mere coin.

[The Memori]{.Futura-PT-Demi}: A statue here depicts a man and a woman
kneeling before the thorned rod that signifies the Bleeding God, its
base inscribed with a list of Montfroid's rulers dating back to the
First Establishment. The Church holds rites honoring the diocesi's dead
here at the turning of every season.

[The Near Fields]{.Futura-PT-Demi}: Much of Castelnou's population works
in the nearby fields of barley, wheat, and vegetables outside the town,
or else lead cattle stabled within the walls out to pasture each
morning. After the harvest, grand tournaments with jousts, joglars, and
archery contests grace the shorn fields. Such tournaments can bring
warriors from as far away from Boclo, eager to gain glory from victory
or silver from successful bets.

[The Seawalk]{.Futura-PT-Demi}: A half-dozen warehouses flank this
cobbled walk, each of them belonging to a local trader. The docks host a
number of fishing boats, with a trading ship or two hauling up monthly
during the warmer seasons. The videm's bailiff is quick to extract a 20%
tax on all treasure or trade goods brought ashore from the ships, though
travelers are excused paying for their personal effects and common
adventuring gear.

[The Winter Market]{.Futura-PT-Demi}: This cluster of buildings marks
what used to be a temporary arrangement of tents and sheds raised by
vendors during the colder months of the year. Now, a dozen small traders
have shared it out and offer their wares to those dissatisfied with the
offerings of the Placa Marat.
:::

::: {#Diocesi_de_Montfroid_PDF.xhtml#_idContainer051 .Basic-Text-Frame}
  ------------------------------- ------------------------------------------------
  [Ruler:]{.CharOverride-4}       Videm Odo Bezier, for the Eveque-Abat
  [Monastery:]{.CharOverride-4}   Sent Miquel, led by the Eveque-Abat
  [Garrison:]{.CharOverride-4}    98 troops led by Sieur Arnaud
  [Economy:]{.CharOverride-4}     Government, trade, pilgrims
  [Populace:]{.CharOverride-4}    1,810, with 405 of them fit for militia muster
  ------------------------------- ------------------------------------------------
:::

::: _idGenObjectLayout-1
::: {#Diocesi_de_Montfroid_PDF.xhtml#_idContainer052}
![](image/Castelnou.png){._idGenObjectAttribute-1 role="presentation"}
:::
:::

::: {#Diocesi_de_Montfroid_PDF.xhtml#_idContainer053 .Basic-Text-Frame}
  [Important Figure]{.CharOverride-4}                                                                                               [Sex/Age]{.CharOverride-4}   [Role]{.CharOverride-4}   [Desires]{.CharOverride-4}
  --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ---------------------------- ------------------------- -----------------------------------------------------------------
  Eveque-Abat Berengar                                                                                                              M/64                         Spiritual Leader          Keep any of his subordinates from getting too strong
  Thin and ascetical man with God in his heart and icewater in his veins. Rewards competence; ruthlessly punishes failure.                                                                 
  Videm Odo Bezier                                                                                                                  M/53                         Secular Ruler             Suppress rival rulers without provoking bloodshed
  Grizzled, constantly-busy warhorse of a nobleman who has no time for novice adventurers, but much use for proven ones                                                                    
  Senhora Lise Bezier                                                                                                               F/50                         Spymistress               Keep her husband Odo safe from treachery
  Matronly spymaster for the Bezier family; has agents in every village. Often acts without bothering to tell her husband                                                                  
  Sieur Ganelon (the Ill-Spoken)                                                                                                    M/23                         Heir and Knight           Find a friend who can forgive him his incredibly poor wording
  Burly blond spare turned heir with his brother's fever-death. Superb warrior, but has an uncanny ability to say the wrong thing                                                          
  Sieur Arnaud Frois                                                                                                                M/33                         Militia Capitani          Solve problems without committing valuable militia troops
  Bespectacled and chinless, but fearsomely dangerous with his well-worn axe. Very parsimonious about militia force use.                                                                   
  Zenaya of Elsewhere                                                                                                               F/28?                        Merchant                  Acquire art and cultural works of the Confederate past
  A dark foreigner from the south, she trades in rare goods off southern ships and is always eager to buy Courontine artifacts.                                                            
  Marie the Shepherdess                                                                                                             F/55                         Madame                    Keep her girls out of trouble by means of information gathering
  Once-famous courtesan, now dean of the girls of the Carriera Lanterne and possessor of half the secrets in Montfroid.                                                                    
  Hugh des Moyens                                                                                                                   M/57                         Schoolmaster              Maintain and recover the glorious past of Montfroid
  Headmaster of the Escola de Falcons; scholar of Montfroid history and skilled joglar. He serves as Odo's own herald.                                                                     
  "Ankles" Froideval                                                                                                                M/39                         Carting Master            Fix the limp he's endured ever since suffering gobelin torture
  Condemned to office work since brief gobelin captivity five years ago, Froideval forms and dispatches many trade caravans.                                                               
:::

::: {#Diocesi_de_Montfroid_PDF.xhtml#_idContainer054 .Two-Column-Text}
Frivet

One of the newest villages in Montfroid, Frivet was established to
secure the trade road between Malvezi and Castelnou. Artisans hurried
there for the sake of the Bosc Rimasser's relatively safe supply of
wood, and in the decades since the village has become prosperous with
their labor.

The village is rich by Montfroider standards, but many of its tithes and
dues are still set by old custom more suitable for poor hamlets. Both
Videm Odo in Castelnou and Abat Montrose in the village's monastery of
Bassat would prefer to see more of Frivet's silver end up in their
hands, thinking it only fair. Videm Solais has been able to resist their
pressure thus far through deft diplomacy and playing them off against
each other. That status quo may not persist indefinitely.

Places of Importance

[Bassat]{.Futura-PT-Demi}: A somewhat loosely-fortified stone monastery
of relatively recent vintage, Bassat is linked with Frivet. It holds 15
monks, most of them being retired craftsmen of great skill. They make a
magnificent ice wine from local grapes.

[Cassaic Weaving]{.Futura-PT-Demi}: The beautifully-painted house of
this family of weavers is renowned throughout Montfroid for the
excellence of the cloth and embroidery made there. Gerald Cassaic,
Solais' older brother, is the family patriarch. A skilled weaver with no
talent at diplomacy, he feels great guilt at having been unable to step
into the videm's role and grant his sister the hope of a simple home
life. He has been known to secretly hire adventurers to handle problems
for her, albeit not always wisely.

[Favia the Moneylender]{.Futura-PT-Demi}: A stout log blockhouse near
the monastery gates houses old widow Favia and her six well-armed sons.
She'll buy up to 1,500 sp of loot per month at half its base value. If
the PCs can get a letter of introduction from a videm or abat, or are
sufficiently locally famous, she'll lend up to 1,000 sp to them at 50%
interest due in six months. She's owed enough by enough people to get
favors from almost anyone in Montfroid. Her iron chests hold 10,000 sp
in coinage, and her will offers 5,000 sp in cash or assigned debt rights
to anyone who brings her murderer to justice should she be slain.

[Frivet Caravansary]{.Futura-PT-Demi}: Run by the cheerful Pessolis
siblings, Estol and Helena, the caravansary sells horses and caravan
gear at book prices. They have enough trade contacts to be willing to
buy up to 1,000 sp of adventuring loot per month, buying at half the
item's base value. They sometimes commission recovery jobs for stolen or
lost cargo, offering half of the recovered cargo for its safe return.

[The Torn Mantle]{.Futura-PT-Demi}: A tavern beloved by carters and
merchants, the Torn Mantle sees much business from the trade road. The
proprietor, Anselm Cassaic, is the black sheep of the Cassaic clan and
would not mind doing them ill.

[The Woodyard]{.Futura-PT-Demi}: Pine, spruce, and birch from the Bosc
Rimasser are stacked in high piles of logs here amid saw-pits and piles
of drying timber. The woodsmen who bring in the forest's bounty are a
daring lot, and some can often be hired for other dangerous tasks.

[Tithe Office]{.Futura-PT-Demi}: Jointly run by Videm Solais' clerk
Odoace and Abat Montrose's representative Brother Bertran, the tithe
office exacts fees on the merchants running between Malvezi and
Castelnou and taxes the goods manufactured in Frivet. The fat clerk and
skeletal monk will buy up to 2,000 sp worth of loot per month at half
its base value. If the PCs do the pair a sufficient favor, they'll buy
at full price; such a favor usually involves dealing with the smugglers
who try to run Malvezi goods past Frivet without paying their rightful
due.
:::

::: {#Diocesi_de_Montfroid_PDF.xhtml#_idContainer055 .Basic-Text-Frame}
  [Important Figure]{.CharOverride-4}                                                                                             [Sex/Age]{.CharOverride-4}   [Role]{.CharOverride-4}   [Desires]{.CharOverride-4}
  ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ---------------------------- ------------------------- --------------------------------------------------------------
  Videm Solais Caissac                                                                                                            F/38                         Ruler                     Find a husband who's not just after her money and rank
  A fading blonde beauty. She wanted a simple life as a good wife, but no one else in the family was as capable a leader.                                                                
  Abat Montrose                                                                                                                   M/53                         Abat                      Squeeze out a bigger share of Frivet's income for the Church
  A fat, clerkly-minded abat who thinks Frivet doesn't contribute nearly enough to Church coffers, but Solais won't tithe more.                                                          
  Lamberts Pineto                                                                                                                 M/35                         Militia Capitani          Compel Videm Solais to marry him
  Handsome, lantern-jawed womanizer with ambitions. Solais dislikes him greatly, but he's too good a captain to discard.                                                                 
  Jean Terralh                                                                                                                    M/58                         Guildmaster               Expand Frivet's artisan's guild to the other villages
  Magnificently talented woodcarver. Despises merchants, and wants all artisans in Montfroid to join one big guild.                                                                      
  Paire Deodat                                                                                                                    M/44                         Village Priest            Make a profit by selling Church favors to the wealthy
  Cynical and mercantile-minded, the saturnine capelan acts as a deniable go-between for buying favors from the abat.                                                                    
  Three-Eyed Duran                                                                                                                M/38                         Carting Master            Hunt down and slaughter highwaymen and bandits
  Laconic chief of Frivet's carters, famous for his accuracy with a crossbow. Nurses a murderous hatred of bandits.                                                                      
:::

::: {#Diocesi_de_Montfroid_PDF.xhtml#_idContainer056 .Basic-Text-Frame}
  ------------------------------- ----------------------------------------------
  [Ruler:]{.CharOverride-4}       Videm Solais
  [Monastery:]{.CharOverride-4}   Bassat, led by Abat Montrose
  [Garrison:]{.CharOverride-4}    14 troops led by Lamberts Pineto
  [Economy:]{.CharOverride-4}     Woodworking and artisanship
  [Populace:]{.CharOverride-4}    489, with 105 of them fit for militia muster
  ------------------------------- ----------------------------------------------
:::

::: {#Diocesi_de_Montfroid_PDF.xhtml#_idContainer057 .Two-Column-Text}
La Parra

La Parra was once more bandit camp than village, an old Confederate ruin
inhabited as a stronghold by ruffians and rebels against the excesses of
the wicked Carlot videms. When the Carlots were finally driven out of
Castelnou, the grateful Eveque-Abat ennobled the La Parras as a knightly
family and dignified their home with a monastery.

Since those days almost two centuries ago, La Parra has been a bulwark
against the pagans of the Maresc. Its rulers are a rough and careless
lot, half-noble at best, but the quality of La Parra blades is as
undeniable as the courage of their wielders. La Parra is willing to take
many that the other villages would shun, and Abat Chabert does not ask
too many questions about either a man's orthodoxy or his past.

Places of Importance

[Breumont]{.Futura-PT-Demi}: An adjacent monastery built into the upper
levels of the Froise iron mine, Breumont is famous for its martial
monks. There, the order of the Wounds of God trains its initiates in
bare-fisted battle, with physical training provided by their regular
work in the mines.

[La Parra Barracks]{.Futura-PT-Demi}: Cleaner and neater than might be
expected, "Bloody" Bartas Jacins keeps the La Parra militia patrols
under tight discipline. While friendly and good-natured to his
neighbors, his men fear him more than they fear the pagans; what he does
to pagan prisoners out in the Maresc has given some nightmares. Bartas
is always glad to contract scouting jobs out to reliable adventurers,
usually paying 10 silver a day per head to bring him reports of certain
sites.

[Parra Keep]{.Futura-PT-Demi}: Once a Confederate hunting lodge, the
steel-hard white stone of the manor has been patched with Mourne granite
and an observation tower raised beside its elegantly gabled roof. Sieur
Raimond holds rough banquets here often, and the exquisitely-sculpted
reliefs on its walls have seen numerous drunken brawls.

[The Belch]{.Futura-PT-Demi}: Named for its constant plumes of black
smoke, most of the iron in Montfroid comes from the smelters in this
corner of the village. Lean Franz the ironmonger speaks for the
half-dozen smelting families that work here. All of them know of his
bandit ties, but he is generous with them, and they fear the
consequences of his displeasure. Lean Franz can fence up to 3,000 sp of
goods per month, but will pay only a quarter of their value with no
questions asked. Doing favors for him might lower his cut to half.

[The Golden Lode]{.Futura-PT-Demi}: Rough, raucous, and grimy, this
tavern is surprisingly devoid of casual fistfights. This is largely due
to the influence of its saturnine barkeep Maurice, an aging widower
locally famed as the dirtiest bar brawler in Montfroid and a good friend
of Bloody Bartas.

[The Master's House]{.Futura-PT-Demi}: A small stone house near to the
keep, bearded Master Guderian conducts his "philosophical experiments"
here. He casts spells as a 3rd level mage, but trades mostly on his
scholarship. He has particular knowledge of metallurgy, mining, bones,
and the identification of magical devices. He knows a half-dozen High
Magic spells and will consider selling instruction in them to those who
bring him sufficiently exotic bones.

[The Sharp Market]{.Futura-PT-Demi}: Famed for the many swords, spears,
and knives sold here twice a month, a dozen smith families have labored
here for more than a century. Any weapon in the core book except
hurlants can be purchased here at book rates. Metal armor can be
commissioned if the buyer is known and respectable, but comes at twice
its usual cost. There's a 1 in 6 chance each week that a master-wrought
blade is available for 500 sp, but the maker will rarely sell to any but
an honored adventurer or known hero.
:::

::: {#Diocesi_de_Montfroid_PDF.xhtml#_idContainer058 .Basic-Text-Frame}
  [Important Figure]{.CharOverride-4}                                                                                                     [Sex/Age]{.CharOverride-4}   [Role]{.CharOverride-4}   [Desires]{.CharOverride-4}
  --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ---------------------------- ------------------------- --------------------------------------------------------------
  Sieur Raimond de la Parra                                                                                                               M/46                         Ruler                     Find a new wife, his last one having perished of the grippe
  Scarred brute, mighty warrior, and mightier womanizer. Few suitable women want to be wed to one such as he.                                                                                    
  Abat Chabert                                                                                                                            M/41                         Abat                      Keep the mines safe and the brawling down to a minimum
  Retired mine capelan with fists like whole hams. Tolerant of imperfect orthodoxy; unmerciful to slacking or cowardice.                                                                         
  "Bloody" Bartas Jacins                                                                                                                  M/33                         Militia Capitani          Exterminate all pagans with spectacular violence
  Friendly, cheerful fellow who enjoys torturing pagan captives to death. Likes Fina, but still feels obligated to eventually kill her.                                                          
  Fina the Painted                                                                                                                        F/26                         Pagan Defector            Get revenge on all pagans for sacrificing her children
  Stained with fearsome tattoos and given to furs and leathers. She keeps the True Faith, but is a raider and huntress at heart.                                                                 
  Master Guderian                                                                                                                         M/62                         Scholar                   Acquire the occult secrets of the tower of Bles
  White-bearded "natural philosopher" and arcane advisor to Sieur Raimond. Rumored to dabble in necromancy.                                                                                      
  Lean Franz                                                                                                                              M/29                         Crime Boss                Muscle several freelance bandits into dealing with him alone
  Whipcord-thin iron dealer who fences goods for half the bandits in the region. Raimond looks the other way for a share.                                                                        
:::

::: {#Diocesi_de_Montfroid_PDF.xhtml#_idContainer059 .Basic-Text-Frame}
  ------------------------------- ----------------------------------------------
  [Ruler:]{.CharOverride-4}       Sieur Raimond de la Parra
  [Monastery:]{.CharOverride-4}   Breumont, led by Abat Chabert
  [Garrison:]{.CharOverride-4}    32 troops led by "Bloody" Bartas
  [Economy:]{.CharOverride-4}     Mining and smelting
  [Populace:]{.CharOverride-4}    499, with 179 of them fit for militia muster
  ------------------------------- ----------------------------------------------
:::

::: {#Diocesi_de_Montfroid_PDF.xhtml#_idContainer060 .Two-Column-Text}
Lebret

Protected by a tall wall of Moure Hills limestone, Lebret is more of a
garrison than a village. It has protected Rossilhon and Castelnou from
pagan incursions for generations, and its population is exceptionally
familiar with martial matters.

Yet while Lebret is famed as a bulwark, it is also known as a persistent
nest of heresy. The Lazac beliefs of the peasants are kept quiet, but
secret rituals in village cellars and unorthodox meetings on the forest
are commonplace, all to offer propitiations to spirits and gods in
exchange for the village's safety. Perhaps half the villagers are
dedicated Lazacs, with most of the rest tacitly tolerating it. The
exception is the abat of its adjacent monastery of Sent Dalmas, who is
determined to root out the heresy and return to the comforts of
Castelnou.

Complicating matters further, a number of Lazacs have extended their
polytheism so far as to serve the goddess of the Blue Sun found in the
depths of the Deep of Milon's End. These double-heretics are mistrusted
by other Lazacs, but they dare not act openly against them lest the
fight reveal too much.

Places of Importance

[Paire Baudrille's Quarters]{.Futura-PT-Demi}: Dour, withered old Paire
Baudrille keeps his quarters inside the village's stone watchtower,
well-guarded by the militia. He handles Church funding for the extra
militia of Lebret, and has liquid funds to buy up to 1,500 sp of
treasure per month at half its base value.

[Peyre the Tinker]{.Futura-PT-Demi}: Cousin to the militia
quartermaster, Peyre's house is an informal shop for equipment and
weaponry "lost" or marked as unusable on the militia inventory lists.
Peyre sells common weapons and light and medium armor at book prices,
but there's a 1 in 10 chance that any given item was stolen from the
armory and might be recognized.

[Sent Dalmas]{.Futura-PT-Demi}: A stone-walled monastery connected to
Lebret's own fortifications, Dalmas houses 25 monks, but none of them
are native to the village. All were sent here due to their zeal for the
faith and their unpopularity elsewhere. They find no greater popularity
here.

[The Broken Bow]{.Futura-PT-Demi}: A low thatched tavern kept by Gros
Alisa, a tall, extremely literate ex-courtesan of Castelnou come home
after tiring of her former work. Her clientele are mostly hunters, with
the poorest lodging around her hearth in exchange for meat and furs.

[The House of Penitence]{.Futura-PT-Demi}: A smoke-stained log longhouse
snug against the outer wall, the House is the usual destination for
Lazacs caught at their work who can't afford to pay the Church fines.
There they twist rope for a few months while being catechized by monks
from Sent Dalmas. Some say that more violent steps are needed for repeat
offenders, but Abat Simos hesitates. Actual heretic-burning risks a
violent uprising that would doom his hopes for a better post, but he may
be driven to it if his current efforts seem useless.

[The Old Barracks]{.Futura-PT-Demi}: A ramshackle former barracks for
the village garrison, Limping Jean the ostler provides stabling for
horses and less tidy accommodations for human travelers.

[The Watchtower]{.Futura-PT-Demi}: A four-story square stone watchtower
looms over the center of Lebret, the whole being about forty feet
square. It contains the militia armory, the garrison barracks, and
enough supplies to support sixty men for a month-long siege. A beacon
fire at its peak can send simple messages to Rossilhon.

[Vila Condat]{.Futura-PT-Demi}: One of several stone buildings inside
Lebret, this rambling farmhouse is the seat of the Condat family, who
once held the videmship. Their many burly young scions forbid entrance
to anyone but those invited by Mother Francisca. Many Lazac ceremonies
are held in its cellars, and everyone knows it.
:::

::: {#Diocesi_de_Montfroid_PDF.xhtml#_idContainer061 .Basic-Text-Frame}
  [Important Figure]{.CharOverride-4}                                                                                               [Sex/Age]{.CharOverride-4}   [Role]{.CharOverride-4}   [Desires]{.CharOverride-4}
  --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ---------------------------- ------------------------- ------------------------------------------------------------------
  Videm Charay Lascaux                                                                                                              M/49                         Ruler                     Get Abat Simos to back off from his incessant heretic-hunting
  Tall blond noble worn thin with worry. Immaculately polite to everyone and desperate to keep a peaceful order in Lebret.                                                                 
  Abat Simos                                                                                                                        M/66                         Abat                      Find and purge the Lazacs here to win a better posting
  Lean and bitter old cleric. Has no deep animus toward Lazacs, but rooting them out seems to be his best ticket out of here.                                                              
  Sieur Aimeric Lascaux                                                                                                             M/30                         Militia Capitani          Resist Simos' demands for help without losing the abat's favor
  Charay's eldest son, big and scarred. Relies on Church funds to support the garrison, but trying not to get tangled with Simos.                                                          
  Mother Francisca                                                                                                                  F/71                         Clan Matriarch            Get rid of Simos and purge the Blue Sun cultists among Lazacs
  Wizened old arch-Lazac and matriarch of the Condat family. Convinced Lazac rituals are all that keep Lebret unpillaged.                                                                  
  Paire Hans                                                                                                                        M/22                         Village Priest            Bring the Lazacs back into the fold without violence or disorder
  New capelan of the Lebret village church, of foreign Kytheron blood. He dreads the consequences of a village civil war.                                                                  
  Andreva Condat                                                                                                                    F/29                         Rich Huntress             Kill some terrible monster to win general acclaim and glory
  Francisca's granddaughter and a renowned adventurer-huntress. Beautiful, reckless, and indifferently Lazac in beliefs.                                                                   
:::

::: {#Diocesi_de_Montfroid_PDF.xhtml#_idContainer062 .Basic-Text-Frame}
  ------------------------------- ----------------------------------------------
  [Ruler:]{.CharOverride-4}       Videm Charay
  [Monastery:]{.CharOverride-4}   Sent Dalmas, led by Abat Simos
  [Garrison:]{.CharOverride-4}    30 troops led by Sieur Aimeric Lascaux
  [Economy:]{.CharOverride-4}     Military garrison and hunting
  [Populace:]{.CharOverride-4}    451, with 210 of them fit for militia muster
  ------------------------------- ----------------------------------------------
:::

::: {#Diocesi_de_Montfroid_PDF.xhtml#_idContainer063 .Two-Column-Text}
Malvezi

Long ago, the nobles of the Malvezi clan found themselves exiled from
Auvergne for their treacherous ways. Coming north, they and their loyal
followers established a namesake village under the wary hand of the
Eveque-Abat. Ever since they have been a thorn in the Church's side, too
useful to banish and too troublesome to ignore.

Malvezi retains many ties with the southern fiefs, and their smugglers
can obtain goods and help that the Eveque-Abat and his videm could not
hope to obtain unaided. In exchange for the barona allowing these goods
north to Castelnou markets, the videm is forced to use a light hand with
the Malvezis. His efforts to establish his own trading relations with
these southern merchants have been unsuccessful, proving surprisingly
prone to misfortune and untimely deaths.

Places of Importance

[Jean's Fish and Salt]{.Futura-PT-Demi}:A very old, shabby stone shop by
the village docks, run by a half-crippled old fishmonger, Uncle Jean,
and a dozen burly "nephews". In truth, Jean is the doyen of Malvezi's
smugglers, and a word from him can have a throat slit by dawn. Anyone
who wants to move goods through Malvezi must give him a tenth, getting
tacit legal protection in return. He gladly fences goods at up to 5,000
sp a month to those who serve Malvezi ends, giving a quarter of the
item's value.

[Malvezi Keep]{.Futura-PT-Demi}: A fine stone keep surmounted by a
seaward-watching tower, many generations of Malvezi rulers have adorned
it with rich foreign ornaments. A dock cut into the cavern beneath it
provides a discreet anchorage.

[Marbleway]{.Futura-PT-Demi}: Named for the white stone of its docks,
these wharves host two dozen small fishing boats, at least half of which
are actually used for fishing. Captains have been known to hire out for
journeys to Montfroid's islands, usually at fifty pieces of silver a
day, payable in advance. None are eager to leave sight of the coast, nor
will they accompany adventurers beyond the shore.

[Sent Pradeus]{.Futura-PT-Demi}: The grandest nunnery in Montfroid, Sent
Pradeus has educated generations of nobly-born girls in the necessities
of the faith, the forms of Courontine etiquette, and the proper
employment of arms. The order of the Crimson Rose is strong here, and
its 19 sisters are all extremely well-versed in archery, bladesmanship,
and small unit tactics. Its Abadesse Galienne taught Barona Sancha years
ago, and is convinced the noblewoman is meant by God to rule all of
Montfroid.

[The Crown and Sail]{.Futura-PT-Demi}: An inn and tavern that caters to
the smuggling trade. So long as he's not left with any bodies to
explain, the innkeeper Otto and his servants pay no attention to the
activities or identities of their guests.

[The Curtain]{.Futura-PT-Demi}: The pride of the village, the Curtain is
the local name for the thick stone wall that encircles the settlement,
raised in the first years of the settlement when the Malvezi's purse was
fuller. Village militia man the top of the wall around the clock, ever
vigilant for raiders.

[The Night Market]{.Futura-PT-Demi}: On the night of every new moon,
black market traders offer their wares in the port-cavern beneath
Malvezi Keep. The guards know not to ask questions, and certain goods
unavailable elsewhere in Montfroid can be bought here. Poisons, drugs,
forbidden books, rare spices, and even slaves taken from foreign ships
can be acquired, though it is up to the buyer to keep them once bought.

[The Yards]{.Futura-PT-Demi}:The busiest shipyard in Montfroid for the
making of small ships and boats. They lack the expertise to build
anything bigger than a sloop, but smaller ships can be built at book
prices with a month or so of effort.
:::

::: {#Diocesi_de_Montfroid_PDF.xhtml#_idContainer064 .Basic-Text-Frame}
  [Important Figure]{.CharOverride-4}                                                                                                  [Sex/Age]{.CharOverride-4}   [Role]{.CharOverride-4}   [Desires]{.CharOverride-4}
  ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ ---------------------------- ------------------------- -------------------------------------------------------------------
  Barona Sancha Malvezi                                                                                                                F/38                         Ruler                     Succumb to her urge to be a grand and terrible rebel
  Unnaturally charismatic widow who has become talebound as the Usurper; obsessed with obtaining the rule of Montfroid.                                                                       
  Abadesse Galienne                                                                                                                    F/59                         Abadesse                  Forge her sisters and pupils into a weapon for the Malvezis
  Known by her peers as "Dagger Gally". Best knife fighter in Montfroid, on a mission from God to make Sancha Videm.                                                                          
  Sieur Milos Malvezi                                                                                                                  M/20                         Militia Capitani          Obtain secular control of Montfroid, if not necessarily the title
  The barona's eldest and heir, groomed from birth for the eventual rule of Montfroid. Charming, courteous, and amoral.                                                                       
  Uncle Jean                                                                                                                           M/66                         Smuggler Boss             Elevate the Malvezis by any means necessary
  Gnarled old "fish merchant" of a family that's served the Malvezis for generations. Cares not a fig for any other lives but theirs                                                          
  Hubert Woodfoot                                                                                                                      M/32                         Privateer                 Plunder any ship not under a Courontine flag
  Peg-legged and jovial, Hubert's sloop, the "Montjoie", is used as much for smuggling as for taking Pacter merchantmen                                                                       
  Mistress Amelie                                                                                                                      F/30?                        Court Wizard              Obtain eternal youth through her sorcerous studies
  The barona's advisor, exiled from Auvergne for witchcraft. Said to make pacts with devil and worse for Sancha's benefit.                                                                    
:::

::: {#Diocesi_de_Montfroid_PDF.xhtml#_idContainer065 .Basic-Text-Frame}
  ------------------------------- ----------------------------------------------
  [Ruler:]{.CharOverride-4}       Barona Sancha Malvezi
  [Monastery:]{.CharOverride-4}   Sent Pradeus, led by Abadesse Galienne
  [Garrison:]{.CharOverride-4}    37 troops led by Sieur Milos
  [Economy:]{.CharOverride-4}     Fishing and smuggling
  [Populace:]{.CharOverride-4}    711, with 190 of them fit for militia muster
  ------------------------------- ----------------------------------------------
:::

::: {#Diocesi_de_Montfroid_PDF.xhtml#_idContainer066 .Two-Column-Text}
Nouvila

The black earth of Nouvila is some of the richest in Montfroid, and
crops grow there that grow nowhere else in the cold diocesi. Its people
are well-fed, but still grumble over the large tribute caravans that
must go to Castelnou each autumn.

Their baron does much of the grumbling. The Nouvilas who rule here are
heirs of Simon Nouvila, who led the Second Establishment from the
now-ruined Sentlir, and they have never been entirely reconciled to the
rule of the Eveque-Abat. Sicard is too cautious to risk open
confrontation over his clan's ancient rights, but his eldest son and
heir is louder about the family's claims.

Places of Importance

[Castel Nouvila]{.Futura-PT-Demi}: A splendid stone house at the center
of Nouvila, the chateau has housed twenty generations of barons. Its
vaults are notorious for the wealth of picturesque artifacts they hold,
albeit few are of much material value. Some say that items of great
power have been forgotten there.

[Sent Alfonzec]{.Futura-PT-Demi}: A stone-walled monastery attached to
the village's wooden palisade, the 18 monks of Sent Alfonzec are
exceptionally friendly to adventurers. They keep a great archive of old
Church documents and scholarly tomes, and rumor speaks of certain
magical grimoires as well.

[The Baronial Archives]{.Futura-PT-Demi}: Maintained by Sicard's shy
daughter Clarisse, the archives in this small stone building contain
records that date back to the start of the Second Establishment,
including many tales of now-lost Deeps and their perils. Clarisse allows
only those with a good reason to peruse them, but giving her a book
she's never read before can win her forbearance. Clarisse is pockmarked
from a childhood illness, and acutely sensitive about it; she fears that
no marriage candidate fit for a baron's daughter would want one such as
her. Bertrans toys with using this fact to his advantage, but
underestimates the violence of her passion should she find herself
misused.

[The Black Sheaf]{.Futura-PT-Demi}: A seedy tavern for the locals and an
inn for merchants, the Black Sheaf has seen more than a few bandits and
thieves posing as carters or peddlers while they measure their marks.
Capitani Bertrans is there often, and has friends in very low places.

[The New Market]{.Futura-PT-Demi}: While a half-dozen artisans have
shops around this square, the most activity happens weekly during the
growing season, when merchants come to buy Nouvila's meat and produce.
Adventurers can usually sell 500 sp of loot weekly at half its value.

[The Old Grange]{.Futura-PT-Demi}: A fortress-like stone manor a few
miles west of the village, monks from Sent Alfonzec once farmed the
splendid soil here. Now the monastery rents the land to any who will
risk the danger outside the village walls, though militia patrols
regularly overnight here.

[The Orangerie]{.Futura-PT-Demi}: A greenhouse of salvaged panes of
unbreakable Confederate glass shelters a dozen small citrus trees from
the Montfroid chill. Old Auberic the gardener and his sons guard the
trees jealously, for the fruit belongs to the baron alone, and his gifts
of it are greedily enjoyed by his allies.

[The Tombs of Nouvila]{.Futura-PT-Demi}: This small Deep below the
village was cleared of its perils and used as a mausoleum for Nouvila's
rulers and gentry for centuries. Several mysterious disappearances
within it led to it being sealed ten years ago, but Sicard still wishes
to be buried within. He would richly reward any who can scout the Deep
and clean out any remaining perils within it.
:::

::: {#Diocesi_de_Montfroid_PDF.xhtml#_idContainer067 .Basic-Text-Frame}
  [Important Figure]{.CharOverride-4}                                                                                             [Sex/Age]{.CharOverride-4}   [Role]{.CharOverride-4}   [Desires]{.CharOverride-4}
  ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ---------------------------- ------------------------- --------------------------------------------------------------
  Baron Sicard Nouvila                                                                                                            M/41                         Ruler                     Build an alternate web of alliances against Odo's rule
  One-eyed and scarred from pagan spears, Sicard would strengthen Nouvila through diplomacy and economic growth.                                                                         
  Abat Ferrandos                                                                                                                  M/66                         Abat                      Scourge the loup-garous of the Forest of Tall Wolves
  Orphaned by loup-garou raids, Ferrandos prays daily for their destruction. He is a good friend to any who strike at them.                                                              
  Sieur Bertrans                                                                                                                  M/25                         Militia Capitani          Enrich himself greatly before absconding to Castelnou
  Hawk-faced and sullen, Bertrans is a good leader but deeply selfish; he wants out of Nouvila, and thinks Odo will pay better.                                                          
  Karl Pied-Noir                                                                                                                  M/54                         Rich Farmer               Get rid of Bertrans, for he can smell the trouble on the man
  Always walking in the fields, watching for trouble; a former Amundi mercenary captain who hasn't forgotten old skills                                                                  
  Morgana the Fair                                                                                                                F/31                         Sicard's Herald           Provoke some great deed she can make a fine song out of
  Honey-voiced and honey-haired, Morgana is Sicard's go-between for delicate jobs with unsavory sorts like adventurers                                                                   
  Sieur Louis Nouvila                                                                                                             M/22                         Sicard's Eldest           Throw off the rule of Videm Odo and the Eveque-Abat.
  Fiery young knight of great martial skill and greater rashness, nursing bitterness over the "usurpation" of his family's rule                                                          
:::

::: {#Diocesi_de_Montfroid_PDF.xhtml#_idContainer068 .Basic-Text-Frame}
  ------------------------------- ----------------------------------------------
  [Ruler:]{.CharOverride-4}       Baron Sicard Nouvila
  [Monastery:]{.CharOverride-4}   Sent Alfonzec, led by Abat Ferrandos
  [Garrison:]{.CharOverride-4}    20 troops led by Capitani Bertrans
  [Economy:]{.CharOverride-4}     Farming and herding
  [Populace:]{.CharOverride-4}    655, with 129 of them fit for militia muster
  ------------------------------- ----------------------------------------------
:::

::: {#Diocesi_de_Montfroid_PDF.xhtml#_idContainer069 .Two-Column-Text}
Rossilhon

Once, Rossilhon was an important nexus for trade from the east, with the
mighty shrine of Montfroid drawing pilgrims and the eastern villages
sending their wares over the Rossil bridge to Castelnou. Alas, that was
in a different time, and now Rossilhon struggles to make do with the
poorer traffic of this later age. The fine stone buildings of a better
time extend well beyond the village's current wooden palisade, most of
them wholly abandoned by the shrunken population.

Many carters and caravan guards call Rossilhon home, but others are
forced to seek their bread in the Bosc de Rossil as lumberjacks and
charcoal-burners. While the Bosc is not as dangerous as some forests in
Montfroid, few such laborers dare sleep under the pine boughs of that
dark wood.

Places of Importance

[Sent Beat]{.Futura-PT-Demi}: One of the two major nunneries in
Montfroid, Sent Beat is dedicated to the care of the mad, the crippled,
and the chronically ill. Conditions are austere for their charges, and
its Abadesse Amicie is constantly dunning families and pilgrims for
silver with which to maintain their work, but many of their wards would
be dead long ago were it not for the care of the sisters. They often
need the help of outsiders to see a patient safely to the nunnery over
dangerous roads.

[The Old Plaza]{.Futura-PT-Demi}: Once the old village square in better
days, this cobblestone plaza is just within the south gate of the
palisade. A half-dozen shops and traders catering to the carting
business surround the plaza, and anything a carter might need by way of
equipment, carts, or draft horses can be bought here at book prices. A
few warehouses hold bulk goods in transit or trust, mostly grains,
tubers, and lumber. It is said less lawful things can be bought from the
far-traveled carters as well, if the right passwords are given.

[The Rossil Bridge]{.Futura-PT-Demi}: Remnant of a richer age, this
grand stone bridge a mile south of the village gates road travel to
Rossilhon and points north. It's a silver coin per pair of legs to cross
it, with a dozen guards commonly on duty to keep it secure. Those who
cannot afford to pay the silver can cut wood to earn their way, or do
other favors that soldiers might want done.

[The Widow's Sepulcher]{.Futura-PT-Demi}: This fine stone manor is too
far outside the palisade to be safe to dwell in, but close enough for
Gaitelgrima the Golden to have bought it as a future tomb for herself
and her reburied husband. She has called on foreign wizards from
Kytheron to secure it and its splendid furnishings from thieves, and the
traps and guardians within are numerous and highly unnatural.

[The Widowmaker]{.Futura-PT-Demi}: A tavern catering chiefly to
charcoal-burners and lumberjacks, the Widowmaker smells of pine tar,
smoke, and sweat. The turpentine-like liquor sold there is effective,
however, and the prices are cheap. The barkeep, Aunt Rubea, is an
ex-charcoal burner who has a more than mercantile interest in the health
of her patrons. She's been known to hire help to go find customers
who've been in the Bosc too long.

[Ut-Indur Carting]{.Futura-PT-Demi}: Many of the Black Pact refugees who
have reached Montfroid can be found working for the Ut-Indurs, fellow
Pacters who arrived in the diocesi some twenty years ago. The eldest
daughter Adakha is the road boss, and she never fails to interrogate
strangers in Rossilhon for any word of the particular crimson-bound
books pilfered from her family before they reached the village. While
she insists that they are but family records, her own faintly sorcerous
air and uncanny senses make some think that there may be more than
family recipes in those old books.
:::

::: {#Diocesi_de_Montfroid_PDF.xhtml#_idContainer070 .Basic-Text-Frame}
  [Important Figure]{.CharOverride-4}                                                                                              [Sex/Age]{.CharOverride-4}   [Role]{.CharOverride-4}   [Desires]{.CharOverride-4}
  -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ---------------------------- ------------------------- -----------------------------------------------------------------
  Videm Contet Borsa                                                                                                               M/55                         Ruler                     Cut a road through the wilds to Lebret
  Pragmatic and trade-minded, constantly chivying his peers to help him keep the roads clear for carters and pilgrims.                                                                    
  Abadesse Amicie                                                                                                                  F/43                         Abadesse                  Rescue the mad and crippled from their misery
  A motherly woman devoted to her infirm charges, and willing to soak petitioners for all they're worth in order to pay for them                                                          
  Otz the Merry                                                                                                                    M/31                         Militia Capitani          Lift the witch's curse, though conventional means have failed
  Once-jovial guard captain cursed by a Fae witch to die the day he next laughs. His men struggle to avoid jokes around him.                                                              
  "Roving" Hugh Guiscard                                                                                                           M/51                         Messenger                 Recover a package he hid while fleeing gobelin raiders
  Famous for his speed and his knowledge of the Montfroid wilds, Hugh can be hired to carry packages almost anywhere.                                                                     
  Adakha Ut-Indur                                                                                                                  F/29                         Carter                    Recover Pact books stolen soon after her arrival here
  A daughter of Black Pact refugees, dark-haired and grim. Some whisper of witchcraft in her uncanny sense for danger.                                                                    
  Gaitelgrima the Golden                                                                                                           F/68                         Rich Widow                Obtain ornaments for the finest tomb ever raised in the diocesi
  Wealthy Kytheronian widow of a great merchant of Castelnou, she is obsessed with rejoining her husband in death                                                                         
:::

::: {#Diocesi_de_Montfroid_PDF.xhtml#_idContainer071 .Basic-Text-Frame}
  ------------------------------- ----------------------------------------------
  [Ruler:]{.CharOverride-4}       Videm Contet Borsa
  [Monastery:]{.CharOverride-4}   Sent Beat, led by Abadesse Amicie
  [Garrison:]{.CharOverride-4}    22 troops led by Capitani Otz
  [Economy:]{.CharOverride-4}     Carting, lumbering, and charcoal-burning
  [Populace:]{.CharOverride-4}    508, with 133 of them fit for militia muster
  ------------------------------- ----------------------------------------------
:::

::: {#Diocesi_de_Montfroid_PDF.xhtml#_idContainer072 .Two-Column-Text}
A Montfroid Bestiary

The GM may have need of combat statistics for the common folk of
Montfroid or the Fae and foul creatures that bedevil them. This section
provides details for some of the more common perils that the PCs might
encounter.

As a general rule, the monsters of Montfroid are not especially terrible
as things go in the Latter Earth. The blessings of the poet-kings and
the vigilance of the Church have weakened many foul powers, and novice
heroes can venture into the wildernesses without being too likely to
encounter invincible foes. Even so, reckless adventurers who rely too
much on that assurance can find themselves terminally disappointed.

Sample Combat Abilities

Some enemies listed on the charts have one or more asterisks after their
hit dice. Such special foes ought to have some extra abilities
appropriate to their nature, one for each asterisk. The list below is
merely a sample. Note that these abilities are all combat-related; it's
likely that the creature may have other knacks, but those are unlikely
to matter much in a brawl.

[Armor-Piercing]{.Futura-PT-Demi}: Their Shock ignores enemy AC. If they
already ignore AC, their Shock increases by +4.

[Bloody Frenzy]{.Futura-PT-Demi}: If reduced below half HP, they get a
bonus Main Action each round until the end of the fight.

[Countermagical]{.Futura-PT-Demi}: Once per scene, they ignore a hostile
spell effect or obstructing enchantment.

[Deflect Arrows]{.Futura-PT-Demi}: Every projectile shot at them has a
flat 50% chance of missing, even on a successful hit roll.

[Grappler]{.Futura-PT-Demi}: They get a +2 bonus on all grappling
checks. If unarmed, they do damage equal to their usual weapon damage.

[Helmcracker]{.Futura-PT-Demi}: If they roll 6+ on their damage die, the
target must make a Physical save or lose their next Main Action.

[Inspiring]{.Futura-PT-Demi}: They have a Morale of 12 and add +1 to the
Morale of their comrades. If they die, however, it forces a Morale
check.

[Instinctive Violence]{.Futura-PT-Demi}: They have to make an Instinct
check each round in combat. If they fail, they automatically attack the
nearest enemy at +4 to hit and damage.

[Killing Blow]{.Futura-PT-Demi}: They add half their hit dice, rounded
up, to all damage they inflict.

[Lucky]{.Futura-PT-Demi}: They make all saving throws twice and take the
better result.

[Mad Charge]{.Futura-PT-Demi}: On the first round of combat, they get a
bonus Main Action.

[Meat Wall]{.Futura-PT-Demi}: They roll 1d4+6 for their hit dice instead
of 1d8.

[Nine Lives]{.Futura-PT-Demi}: The first time in a day they're reduced
to zero hit points, they regain half their maximum HP.

[Opportunist]{.Futura-PT-Demi}: If their target is already wounded, they
roll damage twice and take the better roll.

[Press the Attack]{.Futura-PT-Demi}: Each consecutive attack against the
same target gets a stacking +2 hit/+1 damage bonus that also applies to
Shock, up to +10/+5. The chain is broken if they attack a different
target.

[Sneaky]{.Futura-PT-Demi}: They can perform Fighting Withdrawals as an
On Turn action, and gain a +3 bonus to all checks to beat a Screen Ally
guard.

[Sprinter]{.Futura-PT-Demi}: Their base Move rate increases by 20' and
they can make a Fighting Withdrawal as an On Turn action.

[Veteran's Luck]{.Futura-PT-Demi}: The have the [Veteran's
Luck]{.Bold-Italic ._idGenCharOverride-2} Warrior class ability.

[Vicious Sweep]{.Futura-PT-Demi}: They gain a bonus attack with each
Main Action at their normal attack bonus.

[Vigilant]{.Futura-PT-Demi}: Regardless of their group's initiative
roll, they always win initiative. Against Foci such as
[Alert]{.Bold-Italic ._idGenCharOverride-2}, initiative is rolled
normally.

Sample Fae Abilities

The Fae are gifted with special arts granted by their lords. While some
are common to particular types of Fae, the natural whimsy of their
creators leaves it possible that unexpected abilities might be
encountered.

Creatures marked with a [¶ ]{.CharOverride-6}sign after their hit dice
will have one or more Fae abilities. This is usually one ability per
three hit dice they have, rounded up. Some examples follow.

[Bewitching Beauty]{.Futura-PT-Demi}: If not in combat, a human must
make a Mental save to attack them. Once per scene, they can make a
not-outrageous suggestion to someone; make a Mental save or obey while
in their presence.

[Break the Spirit]{.Futura-PT-Demi}: After a day and a night of
captivity, enslave a human prisoner as if by [Obnubilation of the
Will]{.Bold-Italic ._idGenCharOverride-2}.

[Cloud Castles]{.Futura-PT-Demi}: Once per scene, as a Main Action,
create illusions as if by [Phantasmal Mimesis]{.Bold-Italic
._idGenCharOverride-2}.

[Dreadful Curse]{.Futura-PT-Demi}: As a Main Action, the Fae can target
a visible enemy or deal-breaker with a dire curse. The effects vary
widely, but -4 to hit and damage, a -2 skill check penalty, a painful
deformity, a persistent sickness, or some other blight is common. If the
curse was earned by breaking a deal made with the Fae, even churchbells
cannot purge it; the Fae who laid it must die, or release it, or have
the deal honored after all.

[Faerie Glamour]{.Futura-PT-Demi}: Once per day per HD, as a Main Action
target a visible foe; they must save or be subject to [Damnation of the
Sense]{.Bold-Italic ._idGenCharOverride-2} for all senses. The Fae can
transform what the victim senses but cannot add to it or erase it
entirely.

[Faerie Gold]{.Futura-PT-Demi}: The Fae can conjure food, drink, and
portable objects not made of iron or steel as a Main Action. These items
and their benefits cease to exist at the next dawn.

[Faerie Guises]{.Futura-PT-Demi}: At will, transform as if by [Adopt the
Simulacular Visage]{.Bold-Italic ._idGenCharOverride-2}.

[Forest Ward]{.Futura-PT-Demi}: As a Main Action, can use [The Verdant
Vallation]{.Bold-Italic ._idGenCharOverride-2} once per scene.

[Mad Gabble]{.Futura-PT-Demi}: Once per scene, as a Main Action, the Fae
rants in an incomprehensible but compelling way. Humans must make a
Mental save or lose their next round's actions.

[Unseen Presence]{.Futura-PT-Demi}: Once per scene, turn invisible as
per the [Excellent Transpicuous Transformation]{.Bold-Italic
._idGenCharOverride-2}.
:::

::: {#Diocesi_de_Montfroid_PDF.xhtml#_idContainer073 .Two-Column-Text}
[]{#Diocesi_de_Montfroid_PDF.xhtml#_idTextAnchor006}Folk of Montfroid

The common folk of Montfroid are a tough and well-tested people. Even
the most pampered burgher of Castelnou knows that cannibals and worse
could be within bowshot of the town walls any given night, and it is up
to him to defend his home and his family from the threat.

Commoners and Militia

All able-bodied male Montfroiders take regular turns in the village
militia and are expected to maintain their necessary equipment. The most
talented serve as militia sergeants and squad leaders, training their
neighbors and conducting regular drills and exercises, especially during
the long winter months.

Able-bodied women traditionally serve inside the village walls, training
as archers, runners, and support personnel. Only in dire circumstances
are they sent out on patrol, as few villages can afford to lose women in
their child-bearing years. Even so, the occasional valkyrie may insist
on being sent out with the men if she can sufficiently impress the
capitani.

Nobles and Knights

Male Courontine nobles are trained from boyhood in the martial arts.
Those who lack aptitude for the sword or who are physically incapable of
it are directed into the clergy, while all others are expected to earn
their spurs by the time they reach manhood. Even the least competent
videm or baron can be expected to fight as a "Young Knight" on the table
below, while the more capable ones will equal or exceed a senior knight.

The sons of a videm or baron will be knighted, as will commoners who
show exceptional talent and dedication to a noble's service. This
knighthood is never granted, however, unless the recipient can fight
well enough to merit the name. Such knighthood is not heritable, though
it adds luster to an heir's name. Female knights are rare, but not
unknown.

Noble daughters are not expected to make a career of warfare, but no
self-respecting nobleman would shirk the duty of training his daughters
in self-defense. The bow is the traditional weapon of a genteel
noblewoman, though custom keeps at least a knife on her person at all
times. Those who can afford a monastic teacher from the Crimson Rose are
also trained in unarmed combat by the nuns of that order.

Bandits and Ruffians

Unfortunately, those Montfroiders who abandon the righteous path take
their martial training with them. Bandits prefer bows, thrown spears,
and other weaponry that lets them keep a safe distance from their prey.
All who can get them will also carry knives, hatchets, and other sharp
implements for closer work.

Highwaymen are out for loot, not danger. Most of them won't attack
unless they're confident that they can take their prize with no loss of
life on their part, and a hold-up that produces a nice "toll" is better
than a bloody fray that takes the whole caravan.

Bandits commonly camp in defensible ruins, as the Fae and the pagans
show them no greater mercy than they exhibit towards their law-abiding
neighbors.
:::

::: {#Diocesi_de_Montfroid_PDF.xhtml#_idContainer074 .Basic-Text-Frame}
  [Montfroider Humans]{.CharOverride-4}                                                      [HD]{.CharOverride-4}   [AC]{.CharOverride-4}   [Atk]{.CharOverride-4}   [Dmg]{.CharOverride-4}   [Shock]{.CharOverride-4}   [Move]{.CharOverride-4}   [ML]{.CharOverride-4}   [Inst.]{.CharOverride-4}   [Skill]{.CharOverride-4}   [Save]{.CharOverride-4}
  ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ ----------------------- ----------------------- ------------------------ ------------------------ -------------------------- ------------------------- ----------------------- -------------------------- -------------------------- -------------------------
  Commoner                                                                                   1                       10a                     +1                       1d4 Knife                1/AC 15                    30\'                      8                       3                          +1                         15+
  Active Militia or Bandit                                                                   1                       14as                    +2                       1d6+1 Spear              3/AC 13                    30\'                      8                       2                          +1                         15+
  Veteran Militia or Bandit                                                                  2                       15as                    +3                       1d6+2 Spear              4/AC 13                    30\'                      9                       2                          +1                         14+
  Sergeant or Bandit Boss                                                                    3\*                     16as                    +5                       1d8+3 Sword              5/-                        30\'                      9                       2                          +2                         14+
  Capitani or Bandit Chief                                                                   6\*\*                   18as                    +7                       1d8+4 Sword              8/-                        30\'                      10                      1                          +2                         12+
  Young Knight                                                                               5\*\*                   18as                    +7                       1d8+4 Sword              7/-                        30\'                      10                      2                          +2                         13+
  Well-Bred Noblewoman                                                                       3\*                     10a                     +5                       1d4+2 Knife              3/AC 15                    30'                       9                       3                          +2                         14+
  Senior Knight or Ruler                                                                     7\*\*                   18as                    +10x2                    1d8+4 Sword              8/-                        30\'                      11                      3                          +1                         12+
  a: AC as per usual armor, s: normally carries a shield, \*: has a special combat ability                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
:::

::: _idGenObjectLayout-1
::: {#Diocesi_de_Montfroid_PDF.xhtml#_idContainer075}
![](image/Acharmingandincrediblycuteyoungknightgirlinthickshinyarmorandaredcloakwithbeautifulgoldenpatternsshehasredhairalightsmilea.png){._idGenObjectAttribute-1
role="presentation"}
:::
:::

::: {#Diocesi_de_Montfroid_PDF.xhtml#_idContainer076 .Two-Column-Text}
The Fae, Pagans, and Loup-Garous

The Fae and their wretched human slaves come in seemingly limitless
numbers, forever prowling out of the dark places and deep delves of
Montfroid. Those noted here are but the most common varieties of their
unhappy kind.

Fae

While only the enigmatic Fae Lords know all that is to be known of these
creatures, long experience has made the Montfroiders divide them up into
various types.

[Gobelins]{.Bold-Italic ._idGenCharOverride-2} are the least of them,
seldom more than four feet in height and usually appearing as twisted,
pop-eyed dwarfs. [Woses]{.Bold-Italic ._idGenCharOverride-2} are their
larger brethren, standing man-tall and uglier still. They lead bands of
their smaller kin, or serve a greater [gobelin boss ]{.Bold-Italic
._idGenCharOverride-2}who is the biggest or maddest of their crew.

Gobelins sometimes ride [fae wolves]{.Bold-Italic ._idGenCharOverride-2}
of particolored fur and madcap barding, each waist-high to a man at
their shoulder. The largest of them can even bear woses, though the
gentry of the fae scorn to ride them in favor of sorcerous horses.

[Forest witches]{.Bold-Italic ._idGenCharOverride-2} are those Fae
blessed with uncanny beauty and grace. While not so strong as some of
their kin, they have occult powers, and can cast spells as a 3rd level
Elementalist. Tales tell of mightier witches still, and all know that
the Fae Lords themselves command terrible powers of magic.

[Ogres]{.Bold-Italic ._idGenCharOverride-2} are woses grown gross and
huge, each eight feet tall and swollen with thick ropes of oily muscle.
Their numerous appetites are horrific, and Fae bands must pillage
vigorously to keep them satisfied. Ogres are known for serving under
[Fae knights]{.Bold-Italic ._idGenCharOverride-2}, warriors with
splendid bronze armor and flame-eyed steeds. These chevaliers are all
most handsome or beautiful, and all obsessed with the pleasures of war
and chivalry.

[Cursed beasts]{.Bold-Italic ._idGenCharOverride-2} of every monstrous
description can be found prowling alone or shackled in service to some
powerful Fae warlord. Greatest of these in Montfroid are the rare and
terrible [Fae princes ]{.Bold-Italic ._idGenCharOverride-2}and
princesses, viceroys of the unknowable Fae Lords of the Terra Perduda.
The appearance of one of these awful harbingers promises a season of
grim bloodshed and unholy sorcery for all of unhappy Montfroid.

Fae Weaknesses

While potent Fae are often possessed of uncanny powers, especially those
of illusion and mind control, all of them suffer certain weaknesses. The
more powerful the Fae, the worse these banes scourge them.

[Fae flee the sound of churchbells.]{.Bold-Italic ._idGenCharOverride-2}
Those of four or fewer HD automatically flee as if from a failed Morale
check. Stronger fae take 1d6 damage per hit die as they spontaneously
combust, and must also flee just as their weaker brethren do. The sound
of churchbells also automatically dispels all Fae magic and spells
within earshot.

[Fae take extra damage from iron or steel. ]{.Bold-Italic
._idGenCharOverride-2}Fae automatically suffer Shock from iron weapons,
regardless of their AC, and against Fae of 5 HD or more the attacker can
roll their damage dice twice and take the better result. For such
powerful fae, skin contact with iron inflicts 1d6 damage per round.

[Fae cannot enter consecrated ground]{.Bold-Italic
._idGenCharOverride-2}, such as a church, monastery, or burial ground.
If forced into it, they react as if affected by churchbells.

Loup-Garous

These vicious creatures are shapeshifters capable of transforming
between wolf and man. The shift requires a Main Action and causes the
loup-garou to drop any clothing or items they may be holding. On nights
of the full moon, a loup-garou has no choice but to become a wolf until
dawn.

While in human shape a loup-garou retains its hit dice, attack bonus,
and skill bonus, but it has no special abilities. In wolf shape, the
creature keeps its human intellect but is consumed by a savage lust for
human meat, and wants nothing more than to catch and devour their former
neighbors.

The loup-garou curse is passed on by their bite in wolf-shape. A victim
bitten by a loup-garou must make a Physical save; if they fail, they
will secretly fall prey to the curse over the course of three full
moons. It can be cured with a potion of wolfsbane during this time,
though there is a 1 in 6 chance the recipient is poisoned by the
treatment and must make a Physical save or die. If not caught soon
enough, there is no known cure. Legends speak of relics and sacred
implements capable of cleansing a committed loup-garou, but few know
where such things could be found.

[Whelps]{.Bold-Italic ._idGenCharOverride-2} are freshly-turned
loup-garous, many of which have not entirely reconciled themselves to
their horrific fate. [Savages]{.Bold-Italic ._idGenCharOverride-2} are
those beasts who have wholly succumbed to their nature. They depart
their villages and live within the forest in packs of savage man-eaters.
[Tempters]{.Bold-Italic ._idGenCharOverride-2} are those savages who
have retained more of their intellect, and who pose as fair damsels and
charming young men to lure victims and infect them with the curse.
[Packleaders]{.Bold-Italic ._idGenCharOverride-2} are the awful
chieftains of their kind, savages grown wise in their wickedness. A
packleader can be harmed only by silver, sorcery, or magical steel.

While not strictly Fae, loup-garous do share two special weaknesses.

[Silver burns a loup-garou. ]{.Bold-Italic ._idGenCharOverride-2}Silver
weapons or trinkets harm a loup-garou as iron does the Fae, with the
same worse effect for stronger beasts.

[Loup-garou lose their powers on consecrated ground.]{.Bold-Italic
._idGenCharOverride-2} On such sacred soil they are forced back into
human shape and can use no devilish arts.

Pagans

While conspicuous in their depravity, cruelty, and malice, pagans do not
physically differ from their Montfroider enemies. Their squalid tribes
lair in the Terra Perduda, but their raider bands come more often into
the west to plunder caravans, murder hunters, and perhaps even raid an
unwary village.

Pagan warbands often use the cast-off weapons of their Fae betters,
favoring bronze armor and blades and ragged garb of furs and
wildly-colored cloth.

Large war bands inevitably include at least one pagan shaman dedicated
to the service of their Fae Lord god. Such shamans usually cast spells
as a 3rd level High Mage or Necromancer, though more powerful
devil-wizards have been encountered in the past.
:::

::: {#Diocesi_de_Montfroid_PDF.xhtml#_idContainer077 .Basic-Text-Frame}
  [Fae and Pagans]{.CharOverride-4}                                                                                        [HD]{.CharOverride-4}   [AC]{.CharOverride-4}   [Atk]{.CharOverride-4}   [Dmg]{.CharOverride-4}   [Shock]{.CharOverride-4}   [Move]{.CharOverride-4}   [ML]{.CharOverride-4}   [Inst.]{.CharOverride-4}   [Skill]{.CharOverride-4}   [Save]{.CharOverride-4}
  ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ ----------------------- ----------------------- ------------------------ ------------------------ -------------------------- ------------------------- ----------------------- -------------------------- -------------------------- -------------------------
  Gobelin                                                                                                                  1                       12a                     +1                       1d6 Spear                2/AC 13                    30\'                      9                       4                          +1                         15+
  Wose                                                                                                                     1                       15as                    +2                       1d6+2 Spear              4/AC 13                    30\'                      9                       3                          +1                         15+
  Gobelin Boss                                                                                                             3\* ¶                   16as                    +5                       1d6+3 Spear              5/AC 13                    30\'                      8                       3                          +2                         14+
  Fae Wolf                                                                                                                 2                       15                      +3x2                     1d4+1 Bite               None                       50\'                      8                       4                          +1                         14+
  Forest Witch                                                                                                             4\* ¶                   12                      +3                       1d4+1 Knife              2/AC 15                    30\'                      8                       3                          +2                         13+
  Ogre                                                                                                                     4\*                     15                      +7                       1d6+4 Club               5/AC 18                    40\'                      9                       4                          +1                         13+
  Fae Knight                                                                                                               5\*\* ¶                 18as                    +8                       1d8+3 Sword              6/-                        30\'                      9                       3                          +2                         13+
  Cursed Beast                                                                                                             6\*\*\* ¶               15                      +9x2                     1d6+4 Bite               5/-                        50\'                      8                       5                          +2                         13+
  Fae Prince                                                                                                               9\*\*\* ¶               20as                    +11x2                    1d8+8 Sword              9/-                        40\'                      10                      4                          +3                         11+
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                
  Loup-Garou Whelp                                                                                                         3\*                     13                      +5x2                     1d6+2 bite               None                       40'                       8                       4                          +1                         14+
  Loup-Garou Savage                                                                                                        5\*\*                   15                      +7x2                     1d8+3 bite               4/AC 15                    50'                       9                       5                          +2                         13+
  Loup-Garou Tempter                                                                                                       5\*\* ¶                 13                      +5x2                     1d6+2 bite               None                       40'                       8                       3                          +2                         13+
  Loup-Garou Packleader                                                                                                    8\*\*                   16                      +10x3                    1d6+6 bite               8/-                        60'                       10                      4                          +3                         11+
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                
  Pagan Rabble                                                                                                             1                       12a                     +1                       1d6 Spear                2/AC 13                    30\'                      9                       3                          +1                         15+
  Veteran Heathen                                                                                                          1                       14as                    +2                       1d6+1 Spear              3/AC 13                    30\'                      9                       3                          +1                         15+
  Skilled Raider                                                                                                           2                       15as                    +4                       1d6+1 Spear              3/AC 13                    30\'                      9                       3                          +1                         14+
  Raid Leader                                                                                                              4\*                     16as                    +6                       1d6+3 Spear              5/-                        30\'                      10                      2                          +2                         13+
  Shaman                                                                                                                   3\* ¶                   10a                     +4                       1d6 Spear                2/AC 13                    30\'                      9                       2                          +2                         14+
  War Chief                                                                                                                6\*\*                   18as                    +8x2                     1d6+4 Axe                6/-                        30\'                      10                      2                          +2                         12+
  a: AC as per usual armor, s: normally carries a shield, \*: has a special combat ability, ¶: has a special Fae ability                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
:::

::: _idGenObjectLayout-1
::: {#Diocesi_de_Montfroid_PDF.xhtml#_idContainer078}
![](image/AbeautifulvalkyrieinshinyarmorrideswithaspearandshieldonawindhorsethroughanancientScandinavianforestwithbrightsacredtreesc.png){._idGenObjectAttribute-1
role="presentation"}
:::
:::

::: _idGenObjectLayout-1
::: {#Diocesi_de_Montfroid_PDF.xhtml#_idContainer079}
![](image/giantblackpantheranditsownerstandingonrockmountaindigitalartstyleillustrationpainting.png){._idGenObjectAttribute-1
role="presentation"}
:::
:::

::: {#Diocesi_de_Montfroid_PDF.xhtml#_idContainer080 .Two-Column-Text}
Fearsome Beasts

Like any other wild of the Latter Earth, there are numerous fell
creatures in the forests of Montfroid, many of which are more than a
match of an unwary lumberjack or trader.

[Bloodthorn]{.Futura-PT-Demi}: Masquerading as clumps of wild raspberry
bushes, these plants whip long thorned tendrils up to 60' distant to
catch and rend their prey. They gain a +2 bonus on all grapple checks,
and will always seek to snare a target.

[Devil Beaver]{.Futura-PT-Demi}: Big as a wolf and far more vicious,
these giant beavers are found in packs of 1d6+1, building elaborate dams
in service of some long-forgotten sorcerer's geoengineering project.
They often block navigable streams and attack interlopers savagely.

[Forest Bear]{.Futura-PT-Demi}: Pelted with green, spiny fur like a pile
of spruce branches, forest bears are solitary ambush predators with an
evil temper. Fortunately, they prefer to attack lone victims, so small
groups of travelers are usually safe.

[Gobelin Hawk]{.Futura-PT-Demi}: Named for its ugly, pop-eyed skull and
twisted talons, these birds have a six-foot wingspan and keen eyes for
wounded prey. Such morsels are harassed by flocks of 1d6 birds until
they drop or are abandoned. Due to the swooping attacks of these birds,
enemies with melee weapons must hold their action to attack just as the
bird strikes.

[King Panther]{.Futura-PT-Demi}: Lord of the forests of Montfroid, these
giant panthers live alone when not raising kits. Legends claim they were
the war-mounts of ancient Courontine knights, and those who know the
right chansons can charm them into serving as loyal steeds, if
cat-tempered ones.

[Montfroid Wolf]{.Futura-PT-Demi}: These beasts are both larger and far
more aggressive than the wolves of the modern day, with a greater
willingness to attack humans. Only fire can make them shy back from
their prey. Appearing in packs of 2d6 animals, they instinctively use
Swarm Attacks, with groups of three or four working together to bring
down a victim.
:::

::: {#Diocesi_de_Montfroid_PDF.xhtml#_idContainer081 .Basic-Text-Frame}
  [Fearsome Beasts]{.CharOverride-4}   [HD]{.CharOverride-4}   [AC]{.CharOverride-4}   [Atk]{.CharOverride-4}   [Dmg]{.CharOverride-4}   [Shock]{.CharOverride-4}   [Move]{.CharOverride-4}   [ML]{.CharOverride-4}   [Inst.]{.CharOverride-4}   [Skill]{.CharOverride-4}   [Save]{.CharOverride-4}
  ------------------------------------ ----------------------- ----------------------- ------------------------ ------------------------ -------------------------- ------------------------- ----------------------- -------------------------- -------------------------- -------------------------
  Bloodthorn                           5                       13                      +3x3                     1d6 thorn whip           None                       None                      12                      5                          +1                         13+
  Devil Beaver                         3                       12                      +5                       1d10 bite                None                       30'                       9                       4                          +1                         14+
  Forest Bear                          5                       14                      +7                       1d8+2 maul               None                       40'                       9                       5                          +2                         13+
  Gobelin Hawk                         2                       13                      +4                       1d6+1 swoop              None                       50' fly                   8                       5                          +1                         14+
  King Panther                         5\*                     15                      +6x2                     1d6+3 claw               None                       50'                       8                       4                          +2                         13+
  Montfroid Wolf                       1                       12                      +2                       1d4 bite                 None                       50'                       8                       4                          +1                         15+
:::

::: {#Diocesi_de_Montfroid_PDF.xhtml#_idContainer082 .Two-Column-Text}
Wilderness Encounter Tables

The table below indicates the chances of a random encounter for each day
of travel or night of camping. Encounter checks are rolled on 1d6.

A cold camp is easy to hide, but without the comfort of a fire it does
not count as a night's rest for purposes of restoring depleted resources
or spells. If the adventurers can find a suitably enclosed ruin, cave,
or hut, they can light a fire without increasing the chance of an
encounter.

Daytime encounters start at a range of 2d6x100', while night-time
encounters begin at 2d6x10'. If a group has members capable of night
vision, their night encounters start at the same range as daytime ones.

If neither side is noisy, roll one opposed Wis/Notice check to see who
spots who first. Quick and stealthy PCs may be able to hide from
encounters that do not see them first.
:::

::: {#Diocesi_de_Montfroid_PDF.xhtml#_idContainer083 .Basic-Text-Frame}
  Encounter Roll                               Chance
  -------------------------------------------- --------
  During a day's travel or hunting             1 in 6
  During a night's cold camping without fire   1 in 6
  During a night with a fire                   2 in 6
:::

::: {#Diocesi_de_Montfroid_PDF.xhtml#_idContainer084 .Basic-Text-Frame}
  d6   Encounters in the Swamps of the Maresc
  ---- ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  1    1 pagan shaman with 1d6+4 skilled raider henchmen seeks unclean occult knowledge in the swamp.
  2    Cursed quicksand; each PC must make an Evasion save or fall in; Str/Exert difficulty 10 to swim out if not rescued by someone on the shore.
  3    1d6+1 devil beavers are building a dam
  4    A hermit has taken up residence here; 50% chance he's a bandit chief hiding from the law.
  5    1 Fae forest witch is looking for ingredients; she may feign being a village girl.
  6    1 king panther is out hunting; 50% chance it's recently fed, otherwise it's altogether hungry.
:::

::: {#Diocesi_de_Montfroid_PDF.xhtml#_idContainer085 .Basic-Text-Frame}
  d6   Encounters near the Terra Perduda
  ---- -----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  1    1 Fae knight with a retinue of 2d6 gobelins, 1d6 woses, and 1 ogre
  2    Pagan raiders; 3d6 rabble, 1d6 skilled raiders, 1 shaman, and 1 raid leader
  3    1 desperate Montfroider seeking a taken family member or escaping pagan captivity.
  4    2d6 gobelins have set up near 1d4 bloodvines to lure or drive prey into the plants as a trap.
  5    1 cursed beast prowls the area, tormented by its unnatural existence.
  6    1d8+2 woses riding fae wolves patrol the borders of the Terra Perduda.
:::

::: {#Diocesi_de_Montfroid_PDF.xhtml#_idContainer086 .Basic-Text-Frame}
  d8   Encounters on Roads or Trails
  ---- --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  1    Signs of fighting or murder; roll again to see who died or who attacked here. They may still be close.
  2    A trade caravan from the nearest village; 2 carts, 1d6+4 carters, and 1d6+2 militia guards.
  3    1d8+2 bandits lie in wait; they won't challenge groups that outnumber them.
  4    A militia patrol of 2d4+2 men march along, with a veteran militiaman rider leading them.
  5    A joglar is making their way to the next village; 10% chance they're in league with bandits.
  6    3d6 gobelins are accompanied by 1d4 woses or 1 gobelin boss. The can be heard 1,000' distant.
  7    2d6+2 pagan rabble are led by 1 skilled raider. They're stealthy, but won't chase small prizes.
  8    1d6+2 pilgrims on their way to the next monastery. 25% chance they're bandits robbing the unwary.
:::

::: {#Diocesi_de_Montfroid_PDF.xhtml#_idContainer087 .Basic-Text-Frame}
  d6   Encounters on Plains or Shallow Forest
  ---- ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  1    1d4+2 lumberjacks or charcoal burners are going about their trade.
  2    A flight of 1d6 gobelin hawks are circling the PCs, seeing if any of them are wounded and good prey.
  3    3d6 gobelins are skulking, looking for likely prey. They're quieter than most gobelins.
  4    1d2+1 hunters from the nearest village are bringing back their prey.
  5    1 ogre is hungry, and lying in wait to capture the first human unlucky enough to meet him.
  6    1d8+2 pagan rabble are hunting for easy prey; they'll avoid strong groups.
:::

::: {#Diocesi_de_Montfroid_PDF.xhtml#_idContainer088 .Basic-Text-Frame}
  d6   Encounters in the Deep Forest or Hills
  ---- -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  1    1 forest bear is hiding amid the branches of a downed spruce tree, waiting for prey.
  2    Loup-garous are out hunting; 1d4 whelps with a 50% chance of either a savage or a tempter too
  3    1 faerie knight out riding with 2d6 gobelins mounted on fae wolves; their horns warn of their coming.
  4    2d6 pagan rabble, 1d6 skilled raiders, and 1 raid leader are on their way to their hidden raid camp.
  5    A pack of 2d6 Montfroid wolves are out hunting and have scented the PCs.
  6    A thicket of 1d4 bloodvines lies in the group's path, appearing to be a raspberry bramble patch.
:::

::: {#Diocesi_de_Montfroid_PDF.xhtml#_idContainer089 .Two-Column-Text}
[]{#Diocesi_de_Montfroid_PDF.xhtml#_idTextAnchor007}Milon's End

There are numerous ancient Deeps throughout the diocesi, from the
massive skull of La Rais in the north to the unlucky delve of Folcaut's
Cut in the south. Most of them are left to the reader to flesh out as
needed with the tools in the [Worlds Without Number]{.CharOverride-7}
core book, but the Deep of Milon's End is presented here as a worked
example and as a dungeon suitable for a novice party's early adventures.

The Public History of Milon's End

The Deep that came to be known as Milon's End was discovered one hundred
and thirty-three years ago by a band of charcoal burners who were
fleeing a gobelin raid. Desperate for a place to hide, the peasants
crept into a crevice in the earth that had been exposed by a recent
landslide. Within, they found a twisting stair and signs of ancient
habitation. Fearful of being found by the gobelins, they ventured
unwisely deep and all but one of them fell prey to the perils of the
place.

This sole survivor, Itier de Lomagne, escaped the Deep both with his
life and a shirt full of magnificent jewelry. Buying much friendship
with his treasure, he arranged to have a small keep and a fortified
manor built atop the Deep. There he wed a wealthy merchant's prettiest
daughter and established the de Lomagne family as a name of repute in
Montfroid. Yet despite holding the keys to the Deep that had made him a
wealthy man, he never again dared go below.

Itier's wealth lasted for his life and that of his son, but the expense
of maintaining the estate and a costly marriage alliance with the lords
of Nouvila depleted the family's silver. His grandson Milon de Lomagne
took to adventuring and became quite successful, even winning the
magical blade Blancaflor from the pagans of the Perdut. In time, he and
his allies resolved to descend once more into the Deep and conquer it
for the sake of his family's restoration. Alas, he and his three
companions never returned.

As hope failed, the remaining inhabitants of the keep fled to the safety
of Castelnou, carrying what few valuables remained. The bravest among
them made sallies back to the keep in an attempt to find some trace of
Milon, but the gobelins were very bad in that time and the best of the
de Lomagne blood was lost to their bronze blades. In time the de
Lomagnes dwindled, and now the family matriarch has no wider domain than
the fishmonger's shop that was the dowry of Itier's wife.

In the eighty years since Milon de Lomagne vanished in the darkness
below, scores of bold adventurers have sought out Milon's End in hopes
of plundering fresh riches. Many of them have never been heard from
again, but enough have come back with strange plunder and stranger tales
to inspire future generations of looters. Between gobelin parties using
the Deep as a base for their raids and bandit gangs storing plunder they
never return to reclaim, there is always hope of finding fresh riches
beneath the ruins.

Aside from adventurers, travelers in the wild sometimes find it
necessary to seek shelter in the ruins of the old de Lomagne keep, if
only to have good stone between them and gobelin raiders when night
falls. Less savory sorts sometimes find use for the place as well and
more than a few packs of bandits have made it a base for raiding the
Castelnou road. A few brash souls have even thought of restoring the
wreckage as a new outpost against the dangers of the hills and the
forest but the lord of Nouvila claims rights to the land by virtue of
inheritance. Few care to quarrel with Baron Sicard over a pile of
stones, and so the ruins remain as they are.

The Origins of the Deep

The delving itself was originally an outpost of the Deep Lords, those
unfortunate humans banished far below the upper delvings by their
Outsider masters, exiled long before the beginning of recorded history.
By the time they approached the surface once more in the First Age, all
the useful lands had been taken by the former inhabitants of shallower
Deeps. Resenting their exclusion, the Deep Lords drove shafts upward to
the sunlit regions and sent their armies to take what circumstances had
denied them.

These settlers formed three main groups; the priests who placated the
vengeful and terrible sun goddess, the pioneer warriors who were to take
the land, and the thrall-caste toilers who were to support their efforts
from below. Each of them had their own section of the Deep to occupy,
with the lowest level terminating a transit shaft to the great hive-city
of Radix below.

Their ambition was too great. While the Deepfolk possessed many powerful
secrets of sorcery and arcane engineering, their long exile had changed
them too much. Sunlight was spiritual poison to them. In a vain attempt
to counteract the curse, the Deepfolk of Radix attempted to create a
synthetic sun-goddess through occult rites and certain ancient Outsider
relics. This new "sapphire sun" was to overcome the Yellow Eye and
illumine all the surface lands with the righteous blue radiance of her
rule. Countless surface humans were sacrificed to empower their new
deity and great fanes were raised in their surface settlements, some of
which later formed the ruins that the first Confederates found when they
later migrated to these lands.

In the end, their labors were not enough. The blue goddess could not
defeat the Yellow Eye or lift its spiritual scourge. Eventually, despite
all their prayers and bloody rites of solar propitiation, all of the
Deepfolk surface holdings in Couront were abandoned. Milon's End was one
of the last outposts in the region, falling only when a since-vanished
nation of vengeful surface humans slaughtered the last dogged settlers.
The few Deepfolk survivors retreated to Radix below, collapsing the
transit tunnel behind them.

The tectonic disturbance of the tunnel collapse caused the entrance to
the Deep itself to be covered over in the ensuing landslide, and it was
not until Itier de Lomagne's group rediscovered it that it became known
to the world again. In the hundred and thirty-three years since,
numerous new inhabitants have sought it out for shelter or plunder, and
the remnants of many of these former occupants can still be found below.

Preparing to Run the Dungeon

Veteran GMs will have their own preferred methods for preparing a
dungeon for play, but some readers might benefit from a more explicit
set of procedures.

[Read the entire dungeon.]{.Futura-PT-Demi-Oblique} It's often helpful
to print out the maps and write notes on them about a room's contents or
inhabitants, a habit that can be particularly useful if the PCs start
making a ruckus that neighboring creatures might hear.

[Identify the stair connections.]{.Futura-PT-Demi-Oblique} Milon's End
is somewhat complex in its structure, having four dungeon levels and
stairs that can skip intermediate levels when descending. Make sure you
understand where each stairway on a given level goes, so the players
don't end up arriving in the wrong place when they descend.

[Note environmental hazards. ]{.Futura-PT-Demi-Oblique}The light on the
fourth level will progressively debilitate any PCs that linger there too
long. The party can use the area for quick transit between dungeon
levels, but the penalty will discourage lengthy stays.

[Understand the encounter tables.]{.Futura-PT-Demi-Oblique} Each level
of the dungeon has a wandering encounter table. Every turn, you should
roll 1d6; on a 1, roll an entry from the appropriate table. If you skip
this step the party will have very little reason not to spend all the
time in the world searching every inch of the dungeon and fiddling with
every remotely-interesting object. They need the risk of unplanned
danger to help move them along.

[Understand the common activity rules. ]{.Futura-PT-Demi-Oblique}The
following page includes a list of common dungeon actions and the amount
of time they usually take. It can be helpful to print off this page and
keep it close to hand. Use hashmarks on it to keep track of ongoing
ten-minute dungeon turns.

[Do a mental dry run of an adventure. ]{.Futura-PT-Demi-Oblique}Imagine
your party starting in room 1 on the first level and then think about
the kind of questions they're likely to ask you and the directions
they're likely to go. Carry this mental exercise out until it seems
likely they'd descend a level, or as far as you think they're likely to
get in a single session of play. If you've played with this group
before, you should have at least a vague idea of how they're likely to
face the nearby challenges. Make sure you have answers for their most
probable questions.

[Assemble the players]{.Futura-PT-Demi-Oblique}. Get everyone together
and get their PCs organized. Ideally, players should have a spare PC
made up in case of untimely death. Be ready to introduce these
replacements quickly; don't make a player sit idle too long.

[Start the session.]{.Futura-PT-Demi-Oblique} The simplest way to begin
the delve is to put everyone in room 1 on level 1, having just descended
the stairs from the crumbling ruins of the surface keep. Once the
players are comfortable with the game rules and their characters you can
add in the overland trip to and from the Deep, a day trip that might
have dangers of its own.

[End the session at a good breakpoint.]{.Futura-PT-Demi-Oblique}
Ideally, the PCs leave the Deep between each session, which makes it
easier to add or remove players and manage the sale and storage of
plunder. If the PCs have to camp out inside the Deep, they're going to
need to find some out-of-the-way nook if they want any chance of
avoiding wandering encounters for eight hours.

Finally, [apply consequences to the dungeon]{.Futura-PT-Demi-Oblique}.
Intelligent inhabits who've clashed or bargained with the PCs will take
rational measures to reinforce their defenses or move elsewhere, taking
their valuables with them. Smart enemies won't fall for the same tricks
twice, and may have schemes of their own.
:::

::: _idGenObjectLayout-1
::: {#Diocesi_de_Montfroid_PDF.xhtml#_idContainer090}
![](image/Loneknightridinghorseholdingaredflagonawintersnowylandscapenearanoldcathedralinruinsinafoggycoldmorning-conceptart-3Drende.png){._idGenObjectAttribute-1
role="presentation"}
:::
:::

::: {#Diocesi_de_Montfroid_PDF.xhtml#_idContainer091 .Two-Column-Text}
[]{#Diocesi_de_Montfroid_PDF.xhtml#_idTextAnchor008}GM Quick Reference
Sheet

Before Venturing Below

Before the party begins an adventure session, you need to do some
housekeeping. Talk with the party and have them resolve the
responsibilities below.

[Have the party declare a marching order.]{.Futura-PT-Demi-Oblique}
Decide who's going in front, who's in the middle, and who's playing the
rear guard. Remember that corridors are only 10' wide; room enough for
two well-coordinated fighters, or perhaps three if they're using spears
or short weapons.

[Decide who's carrying the light.]{.Futura-PT-Demi-Oblique} Torches and
lanterns cast a 30' radius light; torches can be used as improvised
clubs in combat. Torches and lanterns won't usually go out if dropped,
but if they're plunged into water or a lantern is smashed the PCs may
need to hope more than one torch was lit. Darkness-blind PCs can't make
ranged attacks and roll melee attacks twice, taking the worst hit roll.
Monstrous and inhuman Deep-dwellers don't need human light to see.

[Decide who's mapping.]{.Futura-PT-Demi-Oblique} Give them graph paper
and a pencil and let them know that each square is ten feet. If the
player wants you to check their map and confirm that they've drawn a
room correctly, go ahead and do it, but it takes an extra turn for them
to pace things off so carefully. If the party needs to flee in haste,
take the map away and just call out intersections and doors until they
stop running. Then give it back; hopefully the mapper can identify where
they are now.

[Decide who's opening doors.]{.Futura-PT-Demi-Oblique} The doors in a
Deep can be difficult to pry open, and a strong arm and a crowbar is
sometimes necessary to budge moisture-swollen wood or rusted iron.
Rather than asking the party who's going to open the door every time
they enter a room, pick a burly PC as the default.

[If necessary, pick a caller.]{.Futura-PT-Demi-Oblique} While it's rare
in this gaming day and age, very large parties may need to pick one of
their number as a "caller". The players can talk over their choices and
make decisions, but it's the caller who tells the GM what the party has
decided. Groups of five or fewer players rarely need a caller, but
larger groups can use them to cut down on crosstalk and confusion.

Dungeon Activity Rules

[Apply First Aid:]{.Futura-PT-Demi} One turn to apply as much first aid
as each party member wants. Each application heals 1d6 HP plus the
healer's Heal skill, or -1 if they have no Heal skill at all. Each
application adds one System Strain to the target, and a target with
maximized strain can't be helped at all.

[Disarm a Small Trap:]{.Futura-PT-Demi} One turn and a Dex or Int/Sneak
check at difficulty 8, if not listed otherwise, to disarm a small
mechanical trap like a poisoned needle or pressure plate. A failed check
is rolled again; if it fails a second time, the PC triggers the trap.
Failed attempts can be repeated after another turn of studying the trap.

[Find Concealed or Secret Doors:]{.Futura-PT-Demi} Concealed doors are
found automatically as part of a turn's search of the room. Secret doors
are found as part of a turn's search with a Wis/Notice skill check at
difficulty 10. Once a given type of secret door mechanism is discovered,
success is automatic on further searches for that sort of door.

[Flee an Enemy:]{.Futura-PT-Demi} The PCs need to tell the GM if they're
doing something to dissuade pursuit, whether that's jamming doors with
iron spikes, throwing down food or loot as a distraction, or setting
fire to something important. If whatever they do isn't enough to
discourage pursuit in of itself, the fastest of the PCs rolls an opposed
Dex/Exert check against the fastest of their pursuers. If the PCs are
fewer in number than their pursuers they get +1 to their roll, and
another +1 if their discouragement was good. The side with the slowest
member takes -2 to their roll. If the PCs tie or beat their pursuers,
mark off one turn and assume they get away or their pursuers fall back;
hopefully the party was able to steer their headlong flight somewhere
safe.

[Manipulate a Device:]{.Futura-PT-Demi} One turn to fiddle with or
operate some complex device or dungeon artifact, or to jury-rig
something out of salvage or supplies the PCs have brought.

[Open a Stuck Door:]{.Futura-PT-Demi} One turn and a Str/Exert skill
check at difficulty 8 or more. If a crowbar or similar lever is used,
add +1 to the check. On a failure, the PC must rest a turn before trying
again. Opening a stuck door is loud, and will alert anything inside.
Monsters and other dungeon inhabitants never need to roll to open stuck
doors, being familiar with the specific wrenching and lifting necessary.

[Pick a Lock:]{.Futura-PT-Demi} One turn and a Dex/Sneak check at
difficulty 8, if not listed otherwise. If done in a rush it only takes a
Main Action but is done at +2 difficulty. A failed check can be repeated
after another turn of studying the lock.

[Search a Room or Object:]{.Futura-PT-Demi} It takes one turn to search
a room for secret doors, hidden objects, and traps. If the players
specifically say they're checking where something is hidden, they find
it automatically. If not, the GM rolls a secret Wis/Notice skill check
at difficulty 8 or more for the most capable PC in the party; on a
success, the party finds whatever's hidden there. Only one check can be
made per turn of searching, but if the whole party helps then the check
gets a +1 bonus.
:::

::: {#Diocesi_de_Montfroid_PDF.xhtml#_idContainer092 .Basic-Text-Frame}
  Common Dungeon Activity                              Time
  ---------------------------------------------------- ----------
  Quietly and carefully move 90' in the dungeon        1 Turn
  Flee a pursuing foe successfully                     1 Turn
  Search an average-sized room carefully               1 Turn
  Pick a lock or disarm a trap carefully               1 Turn
  Negotiate or parley with inhabitants                 1 Turn
  Have a fight with someone                            1 Turn
  Perform first aid and corpse looting after a fight   1 Turn
  Jury-rig something / operate a complex device        1 Turn
                                                       
  Time for a lit torch to burn out                     6 Turns
  Time for a full oil lantern to burn dry              24 Turns
:::

::: {#Diocesi_de_Montfroid_PDF.xhtml#_idContainer093 .Two-Column-Text}
[]{#Diocesi_de_Montfroid_PDF.xhtml#_idTextAnchor009}The Journey to
Milon's End

Preparing for the Expedition

Castelnou's shops can provide any weapon, armor, or other gear the PCs
may desire provided it costs less than 250 silver pieces. More expensive
armor and equipage can only be had through personal contacts and favors.

Hirelings can be brought on with the guidelines on [page
28](#Diocesi_de_Montfroid_PDF.xhtml#_idTextAnchor005), if any are
available in town. Each will demand a full share of the expedition's
loot.

Prior stories would suggest to any group that they should have at least
a few days of rations, suitable light sources, and enough camping
supplies to make a short stay at the ruined keep tolerable.

Each PC should be given one randomly-rolled rumor from the table below.
The village gossips believe them all to be true, though false ones are
marked for the GM's benefit.

Journeying to the Keep

The table below gives the time required for a party to journey to
Milon's End from various locations. A group moving at this pace has a 1
in 6 chance of a random encounter while traveling in the wilderness.

If the PCs are forced to camp overnight in the wilderness, they can make
a cold camp at a 1 in 6 risk of a nighttime encounter. Such a camp will
not let them recover System Strain, spells, or hit points. A camp with a
fire will be more comfortable, but have a 2 in 6 chance of encounters.
Daytime encounters start at 2d6x100' distance, and nighttime at 2d6x10'.
:::

::: {#Diocesi_de_Montfroid_PDF.xhtml#_idContainer094 .Basic-Text-Frame}
  d10   Rumors in Castelnou
  ----- ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  1     Baron Sicard in Nouvila is sure to give Milon's End as a fief to anyone who can conquer it.
  2     There is more than one way into the Deep.
  3     A holy hermit in the depths of Milon's End can cure any sickness if he can be found. (F)
  4     A band of pagan raiders was spotted near the Deep last week.
  5     The Deep is full of the shades of its restless dead. (F)
  6     There are four levels to the Deep.
  7     Some villagers from Lebret were going to the Deep last month, for reasons none can say.
  8     The Deep has many hidden passages.
  9     The water of the stalagmite pool has a magical blessing for those who drink it. (F)
  10    They call it Milon's End, but Milon de Lomagne is not as dead as he should be.
:::

::: {#Diocesi_de_Montfroid_PDF.xhtml#_idContainer095 .Basic-Text-Frame}
  From This Location to Milon's End   Time
  ----------------------------------- ---------
  Castelnou                           8 hours
  Mother Alba's Wayhouse              2 hours
  Frivet                              2 hours
  Lebret                              8 hours
:::

::: {#Diocesi_de_Montfroid_PDF.xhtml#_idContainer096 .Basic-Text-Frame}
  d8   Random Encounters On the Way
  ---- ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  1    1d4+2 [Peasant Cultists]{.Monster-All-Caps} [(AC 12, HD 1, Atk +1, Dmg 1d6 spear, Shock 2/13, Skill +0, Morale 9, Instinct 3) are on their way to Milon's End. They will claim to be woodsmen working in the Bosc Rimasser, though they have but one axe among them. They will report this meeting to Father Marceau.]{.CharOverride-1}
  2    1d6+2 [Gobelins ]{.Monster-All-Caps}[(AC 13, HD 1, Atk +1, Dmg 1d6 spear, Shock 1/13, Skill +0, Morale 8, Instinct 4) are a scouting party for their brethren in the Deep. They will only attack if the party looks significantly weaker; otherwise they will stalk the PCs until driven off or the PCs pass beyond their reach.]{.CharOverride-1}
  3    1d3 [Wolves]{.Monster-All-Caps} [(AC 13, HD 2, Atk +3, Dmg 1d6 bite, Shock N/A, Skill +1, Morale 8, Instinct 5) are out hunting. A low Reaction Roll means hunger; they may attack if the party is few or bloodied.]{.CharOverride-1}
  4    A frantic woodsman begs help; a tree fell on his partner Jacques and broke his leg, and he cannot get the wounded man back to safety before nightfall. Even odds that the plea is sincere, earning the gratitude of the two men, or that it is an ambush laid by four [Bandits]{.Monster-All-Caps} [(AC 12, HD 1, HP 6/5/3/3, Atk +1, Dmg 1d6 bow or spear, Shock N/A bow or 2/13 spear, Skill +1, Morale 9, Instinct 3)]{.CharOverride-1}
  5    A huntsman is found pinned to a tree by a bronze-headed spear, the body stripped and hideously mutilated.
  6    Saintly old Brother Jean the hermit encounters the party. He has arts of healing, and can cure 1d6 damage for each of them at no System Strain cost. He can lead them to Milon's End or Castelnou with no chance of hostile encounters, and will do so if the PCs seem to be godly adventurers.
  7    The sound of a brazen horn in the distance warns of an approaching gobelin war band. The party can flee or hide automatically, but if they choose to remain they will face 20 cruel gobelins with bows and spears, and are unlikely to survive the meeting.
  8    [Mistress Thusnelda]{.Monster-All-Caps}, [(AC 13, HD 4, HP 20, Atk +2, Dmg 1d4 knife, Shock 2/15, Skill +2, Morale 9, Instinct 3), ]{.CharOverride-1}the witch of the Bosc Rimasser, is out with her familiar [Chou]{.Monster-All-Caps}, a hulking wolf [(AC 13, HD 3, HP 20, Atk +4, Dmg 1d6+2 bite, Shock N/A, Skill +2, Morale 11, Instinct 5). Thusnelda casts up to 2 spells as 3rd level High Mage, and has Wind of Final Repose, The Excellent Transpicuous Transformation, and the Verdant Vallation prepared. She is an ally of convenience to the pagan raiders, and desires human corpses and monster body parts for her work. Otherwise, she is charming and gracious.]{.CharOverride-1}
:::

::: {#Diocesi_de_Montfroid_PDF.xhtml#_idContainer097 .Two-Column-Text}
[]{#Diocesi_de_Montfroid_PDF.xhtml#_idTextAnchor010}The Keep, The Deep,
and its Denizens

The Keep of the de Lomagnes

What once was a fortified manor is now no more than a skeleton of stone
and fallen timbers. The footprint of the ruin is about 50' square, but
the only covered structure is the remains of a 10' x 20' storeroom near
the south side of the ruin. Prior hands have roofed it over in sticks
and branches and knocked a few holes in the stone wall for peepholes and
arrow slits. The door has long since disappeared. Even so, the PCs can
sleep comfortably in the storeroom, keeping a small fire and suffering
only a 1 in 10 chance of random nighttime encounters.

The actual entrance to the Deep is ten paces distant from the storeroom,
a spiral stair leading down to room 1 of level 1 of the Deep.

Every time the PCs arrive at the ruined keep, there is a 1 in 6 chance
that someone is currently using the storeroom for a camp. The random
encounter table on the prior page can give suggestions as to who it
might be.

Major Groups of Inhabitants

A GM should be familiar with the inhabitants and structure of the Deep
before they run the adventure. Most of the inhabitants are at least
somewhat susceptible to diplomacy, and the campaign is likely to be a
short one if the PCs are forced to draw blades every time they run into
a Deep-dweller.

[The Gobelins]{.Monster-All-Caps} are raiders and thieves who stay
mostly on level 1, with occasional forays deeper to search for loot.
They attack peasant cultists or bandits gleefully but will avoid pagans,
as they believe they serve the same master. They have a deep hatred for
all humans, but will fight only when the odds are firmly in their favor.

[The Peasant Cultists]{.Monster-All-Caps} are servants of the Blue Sun
goddess the Deepfolk venerated here, heirs to a generations-old faith.
They come from the village of Lebret to conduct rites of human sacrifice
on the fourth level under the guidance of their leader, Father Marceau.
They remain devoted to the Blue Sun for the sake of the healing miracles
she grants, but fear being revealed to the stern and pious Abat Simos of
the monastery of Sent Dalmas at Lebret. They will not want to let
outsiders go without having the strangers join in their heresy or
otherwise convince them that their secrets will be kept. They hate the
gobelins, ignore the Soft Thralls, and privately despise their new pagan
co-religionists.

[The Pagan Raiders]{.Monster-All-Caps} came here as a warband from the
Perdut, searching the Deep for plunder. After a terrifying miracle from
Father Marceau and the threat of certain death, most have elected to
abandon their Fae Lord and instead serve the Blue Sun. They feel
trapped, unable to return home to certain torment and yet sure they will
be killed by Montfroiders sooner or later if they stay. Perhaps if all
their recalcitrant brethren were killed they could return home with no
one the wiser to their treachery. They hate Montfroiders, including
their new brethren in the faith, but could overlook that on behalf of
those that might help them flee.

[The Soft Thralls]{.Monster-All-Caps} are the only "original"
inhabitants of the Deep, wretched slaves of semi-liquid flesh mantling
the bones of the long dead. All of them were made to serve certain
purposes and now they are unable to do anything else. The gobelins,
cultists, and raiders view them as little more than an environmental
hazard to be avoided. While they are slaves to their design, outsiders
who help them fulfill their purposes might win such limited cooperation
as they can grant.

The Structure of the Deep

The top three levels of the Deep have been carved out of native granite
by ancient sorceries. The interior walls are foot-thick barriers of
solid stone.

The fourth level of the deep is mostly a large natural cavern, both it
and the sculpted chambers fashioned out of a translucent blue glass that
transmits light. The glass is as tough as granite and will not chip or
crack readily.

Doors in the Deep are mostly of ancient funguswood, the material largely
impervious to the passage of centuries. It does not burn, charring and
smoldering instead, but can be chopped with axes or suitable tools and 2
turns of work.

Ventilation is provided by wrist-sized air shafts routed to various
hidden places on the surface. Many of them are clogged by now, leaving
the air thick and stale in most areas.

[The stone of the Deep is partially impervious to the Decree of Lithic
Dissolution spell. ]{.Dungeon-Emphasis}So much magic was used in
fashioning the place that the walls are no longer entirely non-magical
stone. Each casting of the spell can penetrate no more than a foot of
the Deep's rock, sufficient to knock a hole in an interior wall but
unable to burrow into or out of a level.
:::

::: _idGenObjectLayout-1
::: {#Diocesi_de_Montfroid_PDF.xhtml#_idContainer098}
![](image/ThesilhouetteofafemalewarriorwhostandswithanaxeinherhandsattheentrancetoadarkdungeonthebrightraysofthesunShineonherback.2D.png){._idGenObjectAttribute-1
role="presentation"}
:::
:::

::: {#Diocesi_de_Montfroid_PDF.xhtml#_idContainer099 .Two-Column-Text}
[]{#Diocesi_de_Montfroid_PDF.xhtml#_idTextAnchor011}Level 1: The Gates
of The Great Ascent

1.[ Entrance:]{.Early-Module-Character-Styles_EM-Heavy-Caps-Run-In
._idGenCharOverride-4} A line of [faintly glowing blue
glyphs]{.Dungeon-Emphasis} runs along the floor from the ascending
spiral stairway down the descending flight of stairs to the south. The
marks are perhaps a pace wide and depict a stylized sun cracking down
the center, with a smaller circle within. The light each glyph casts is
barely more than a candle.

Two [man-sized warrior statues]{.Dungeon-Emphasis} flank the room, each
one extending a mace-like stone rod toward the other. The men depicted
by the statue have thin faces and large eyes, and are clad in strange,
sinewy armor. Twisting the eastern statue's mace clockwise will unlatch
the secret door and cause it to swing open.

2.[ Regalia
Storage:]{.Early-Module-Character-Styles_EM-Heavy-Caps-Run-In
._idGenCharOverride-4} A dozen small stone coffers rest on stone shelves
here, once holding the ritual regalia that Itier de Lomagne plundered
long ago. The [Soft Thrall Walker Cadan-Mok]{.Monster-All-Caps} in the
guise of an emaciated Deepfolk male frantically opens and closes the
stone boxes, whimpering wetly to itself as it searches for the lost
regalia.

It will fail to notice any intruders for two rounds. After this, it will
begin to ask strangers where the "regalia of ascent" has gone in Court
Riu, becoming progressively more agitated. After six rounds of useless
querying, it will attack any PCs who have not left the room already.

If the PCs give Cadan-Mok something, it will immediately rush from the
room to pass through the concealed door in room 3, open the secret door
in room 4, and place the "regalia" it was given on the shelves in room
8. It will then return to this room and repeat its behavior
indefinitely.

[Soft Thrall Walker Cadan-Mok ]{.Monster-All-Caps-Demi}(AC 15, HD 3, HP
18, Atk +3, Dmg 1d8+1, Shock 2/15, Skill +1, Morale 9, Instinct 3)

3.[ Thrall Duty
Room:]{.Early-Module-Character-Styles_EM-Heavy-Caps-Run-In
._idGenCharOverride-4} In the corner of the room, a narrow spiral stair
descends 150 feet to room 3 on level 4 of the dungeon. [Four smoothed
troughs]{.Dungeon-Emphasis} have been carved into the floor on the south
side of the room, each one about two paces long, one wide, and a
handspan deep. Once they served as sleeping-pits for thralls awaiting
duty; now they are filled with filth and damp dust.

The back of the concealed door to room 4 is obvious here, with a latch
on the left side and a peephole at head height. A narrow passage runs
west, beneath the entrance stair in room 1, giving access to the beast
cells at 17.

4.[ Garden of
Promise:]{.Early-Module-Character-Styles_EM-Heavy-Caps-Run-In
._idGenCharOverride-4} An [eroded spring-fed pool]{.Dungeon-Emphasis}
has worn away the stone around its channel and created a shallow
underground creek. Following the creek's water-carved tunnel a thousand
paces east reveals a crevice that opens out on a brushy hillside east of
the ruined keep. The pool itself has a handspan-wide drain in the bottom
that eventually leaks through the ceiling of room 18 on level 2.

The floor of the room has been inlaid with dull greenstone slabs
painstakingly thatched with grass-pattern carvings. [Verdigrised copper
trees]{.Dungeon-Emphasis} stand around the pool, reaching up toward the
thirty-foot dome of the ceiling overhead. Some of their branches appear
to have been hacked or twisted off.

The walls bear [strange bestial bas-reliefs]{.Dungeon-Emphasis}
depicting monstrous creatures of a prior age striding among trees unlike
any that grow in Couront's present age. Flecks of ancient paint can be
seen adhering to some carvings.

At the summit of the ceiling, [a pale blue sun]{.Dungeon-Emphasis} casts
a cobalt radiance over the room, making the green of the floor and the
verdigris appear black. The blue sun flickers unsteadily, like a dying
fluorescent light.

The concealed door to room 3 is hidden behind a copper tree, a
rectangular inset panel that swings open when pushed. The secret door is
hidden as a carving of a man-tall praying mantis with a peephole in one
bulging eye. Twisting the eye opens the door.

4A.[ Antechamber of
Exhortation:]{.Early-Module-Character-Styles_EM-Heavy-Caps-Run-In
._idGenCharOverride-4} This room is overrun with [huge, pale
fungi]{.Dungeon-Emphasis} that shine with unnatural colors when
illuminated by blue light. At the far end of the room is a [half-rotted
corpse in peasant clothing]{.Dungeon-Emphasis}. The air is faintly dusty
from the clouds of fungal spores.

The first time each day the party enters the room, the GM should roll a
secret Physical saving throw for each PC, noting down which failed
theirs. The GM should inform the party that their characters feel a
sudden surge of confidence and boldness, gaining 4 hit points each even
if it exceeds their maximum. Repeated visits to this room give the same
encouragement, but the bonus hit points can be gained or the save failed
only once per day.

If a PC failed the Physical saving throw, the next physical harm that
doesn't Mortally Wound them is ignored as fungal spores repair the wound
instantly. If the PC is Mortally Wounded before the next night's sleep,
however, they must make a Physical save or die instantly from the strain
on their body, collapsing into a pile of liquefied flesh and stunted
fungal bulbs.

The corpse at the end of the room was a heretic from level 3 who relied
too much on the fungus' effects and bled out from an untended wound. He
lies atop his jeweled and golden-chased breviary, the pages rotted to
illegibility but the binding worth 200 sp.

5.[ Library:]{.Early-Module-Character-Styles_EM-Heavy-Caps-Run-In
._idGenCharOverride-4} Stone cubbies in the wall hold several dozen
[decaying metal scrolls]{.Dungeon-Emphasis}. They have long since
collapsed into solid blue-green masses of rotten metal, dripping out of
their cubbies and forming long stringy ropes of corrosion. Anything that
touches the metal is permanently stained blue-green.

Behind one of the rotten scrolls, a long-dead priestly scribe hid a
bribe. Those who find it will discover a woven-wire pouch with twenty
thumbnail-sized blue gemstones cut as thin, faceted discs. Each gem is
worth 25 sp.

6.[ Priest's
Cenaculum:]{.Early-Module-Character-Styles_EM-Heavy-Caps-Run-In
._idGenCharOverride-4} A [long stone table]{.Dungeon-Emphasis} dominates
the center of this room with chairs of carved fungus-wood on either
side. The walls are engraved with [images of a great
banquet]{.Dungeon-Emphasis}, with thin-faced Deepfolk priests clad in
elaborate robes dining on both humans and long-extinct surface
creatures. On the ceiling of the cenaculum the broken-sun sigil of their
goddess shines with a flickering blue radiance.

7.[ Upper Priest
Quarters:]{.Early-Module-Character-Styles_EM-Heavy-Caps-Run-In
._idGenCharOverride-4} The walls dimly shine with the blue light of
broken sun glyphs. A raised stone sleeping platform is in the northeast
corner and a pile of ill-cured hides is spread out on the floor next to
it.

Squatting on the hides is [Dirty Marta the bandit chief
]{.Monster-All-Caps}[and four ]{.CharOverride-1}[desperate
bandits]{.Monster-All-Caps}[.]{.CharOverride-1} They entered the Deep in
search of plunder, were attacked by the gobelins in room 19, and escaped
through the secret door in room 13. Two of the bandits are wounded, and
all are afraid of facing the gobelins in room 13 once more without
additional reinforcements.

The bandits will not fight unless first attacked. Marta will claim that
they're a group of adventurers in search of glory, and invite the PCs to
join them in an assault on the gobelins in room 19. Her plan is to let
the PCs draw the Fae attention before turning and fleeing for the exit,
though if the party does very well she might linger long enough to
backstab survivors for their loot. Unless certain of victory, the
bandits will be much more interested in escaping than fighting.

The bandits have little plunder, with 108 sp worth of coinage taken from
prior victims. Marta has a magically-sharp bronze [dagger +1]{.Bold
._idGenCharOverride-5} in her shirt, however, though the pagan
workmanship of the weapon will cause a -1 Reaction Roll penalty from any
Montfroider who sees someone bearing it.

[Dirty Marta the bandit chief ]{.Monster-All-Caps-Demi}[(AC 13, HD 2, HP
10, Atk +3, Dmg 1d6+2 shortsword, Shock 3/15, Skill +1, Morale 10,
Instinct 2)]{.CharOverride-1}

[desperate bandits ]{.Monster-All-Caps-Demi}(AC 11, HD 1, HP 7/4/1/2,
Atk +1, Dmg 1d6 spear, Shock 2/13, Skill +0, Morale 8, Instinct 3)

8.[ Vestry:]{.Early-Module-Character-Styles_EM-Heavy-Caps-Run-In
._idGenCharOverride-4} Shelves and stone hooks once held the elaborate
vestments worn by the priesthood of the blue sun. Now only
unrecognizable piles of rotted fungus-fiber and broken scraps of stone
jewelry can be found here. The secret door and peephole on the north
wall leading to room 4 is obvious from this side of it.

9.[ Shrine to the Sapphire
Sun:]{.Early-Module-Character-Styles_EM-Heavy-Caps-Run-In
._idGenCharOverride-4} Curtains of woven chain frame an [altar to the
blue sun goddess]{.Dungeon-Emphasis}. The base of the statue depicts a
shattered sun, split in half by the ascent of the goddess from within.
The altar before it has a body-shaped depression cut into the top, with
a channel carved to let the blood of a sacrifice bathe the idol's feet.

The idol is carved of azure stone and stands twelve feet high. Its eyes
are brilliant gemstones that shine with torch-bright blue radiance. Each
turn of being exposed to this light will inflict one System Strain on
surface creatures, however, with the gain passing unnoticed until the
victim falls unconscious or gains System Strain from some other source.
Unconscious creatures in the gem's light will die after one turn. The
gems themselves can be sold for 250 sp each to a sufficiently reckless
jeweler, but will sublimate into nothingness after a week away from the
statue. New gems will crystallize in the idol's eyesockets during that
time.

Behind the woven-wire curtains, an archway leads to a spiral staircase
that plunges 50 feet down to room 1 on level 2. A mosaic of the
triumphant goddess surrounding the stair conceals a [small secret
door]{.Dungeon-Emphasis} in the west wall, the latch triggered by
pressing the right mosaic tile. That tile is protected by a [poison
needle trap]{.Dungeon-Emphasis} sufficient to pierce a leather glove; if
not discovered and disarmed, or if the tile is not pressed with a tool,
the victim must make a Physical save or take 2d6 damage and gain that
many System Strain points.

10.[ Ritual Implement
Storage:]{.Early-Module-Character-Styles_EM-Heavy-Caps-Run-In
._idGenCharOverride-4} A few broken shards of bluestone ritual vessels
lie on the floor, all that remains of the altar furnishings that were
once stored here. The few legible carvings on them depict Deepfolk
raising up human corpses on spears to a blue sun overhead.

11.[ Guard Duty
Post:]{.Early-Module-Character-Styles_EM-Heavy-Caps-Run-In
._idGenCharOverride-4} Dust and filth cake the this room, and [assorted
Deepfolk graffiti]{.Dungeon-Emphasis} has been carved into the walls
during ages past. If somehow translated, it consists chiefly of vulgar
insults toward the commanding officer and complaints about the laziness
of the thralls and the ineptitude of the kitchener.

12.[ Purification
Room:]{.Early-Module-Character-Styles_EM-Heavy-Caps-Run-In
._idGenCharOverride-4} A [trickling blue stone
waterspout]{.Dungeon-Emphasis} on the south side of the room fills a
basin with clean water. At its foot, a pony-sized [cave
lizard]{.Monster-All-Caps}[ is lapping at the water. Unless provoked or
its Reaction Roll is exceptionally low, it will avoid the PCs; it will
only attack if hungry or threatened, and will seek to escape unless
starving. If fed, it will follow the PCs for an hour, fighting alongside
them until significantly hurt or entirely sated.]{.CharOverride-1}

[cave lizard ]{.Monster-All-Caps-Demi}(AC 13, HD 3, HP 12, Atk +3, Dmg
1d6+1, No Shock, Skill +1, Morale 8, Instinct 4)

13.[ Procession of
Glory:]{.Early-Module-Character-Styles_EM-Heavy-Caps-Run-In
._idGenCharOverride-4} A thirty-foot domed ceiling covers a room walled
in intricate mosaics of Deepfolk warriors marching upward toward a
surface lit by a blue sun. Two man-sized Deepfolk warrior statues like
those in room 1 stand in the northern corners of the room. Bloody [signs
of battle]{.Dungeon-Emphasis} stain the glowing line of broken sun
glyphs on the floor. Large wet bloodstains drag toward the western door,
while a careful inspection of the floor will reveal smaller droplets
leading toward the secret door. Twisting the eastern statue's mace
counterclockwise will open it. In the southwest corner, a rusted
breastplate has been hung up as a crude gong.

On the eastern wall, the carvings conceal a peephole from the passage on
the other side of the wall. This peephole gives a clear view of the
entire room.

Six [gobelin warriors]{.Monster-All-Caps} dice in the center of this
room, awaiting an escape attempt by the bandits in room 7. If intruders
arrive, they'll try to stall them with a parley while one of them creeps
toward the makeshift gong in the corner. If allowed to reach it, they'll
hammer it to bring allies from room 19 in 1d6+1 rounds. These allies
will not respond to ordinary combat sounds, as the gobelins have already
brawled once over dice cheating. The gobelins have nothing of worth
beyond their crude bronze-tipped spears.

[gobelin warriors ]{.Monster-All-Caps-Demi}(AC 12, HD 1, HP 6/6/5/4/4/3,
Atk +1, Dmg 1d6 spear, Shock 2/13, Skill +0, Morale 8, Instinct 4)

14.[ Kitchen:]{.Early-Module-Character-Styles_EM-Heavy-Caps-Run-In
._idGenCharOverride-4} Stone counters and a long-dry waterspout line the
walls of this room. The far side has [a counter with a large
oven]{.Dungeon-Emphasis}, in which lies a glowing green stone. Any
object put within the oven suffers 1d4 points of damage per round as it
is heatlessly burnt; the Deepfolk used such "cold fires" to process raw
foodstuffs into more digestible forms without burning precious
combustibles or oxygen. The stone loses its power if pried from the
oven.

One of the stone counters has had its massive countertop broken loose
from the base and propped askew to cover the cavity beneath. It requires
at least 45 total points of Strength to move it, and the stone will
crash down loudly afterwards if 60 points are not used, alerting the
gobelins in room 19.

Within the hollow counter is the treasure trove of the gobelins on this
level, amounting to 650 sp worth of loose coins, three pieces of jewelry
worth 100 sp each, and two magical [elixirs of healing]{.Bold
._idGenCharOverride-5} that will cure 1d6+2 hp of damage each if drunk.
A palm-sized Deepfolk beetle-sigil is worthless in itself, but it is the
control sigil for Cadan-Mok in room 2, and bears his name in Deepfolk
script on the back.

15.[ Hall of Upper-World
Marvels:]{.Early-Module-Character-Styles_EM-Heavy-Caps-Run-In
._idGenCharOverride-4} A number of decayed [surface-world
exhibits]{.Dungeon-Emphasis} are arrayed around the outside of this
room. Artificial copies of trees, plants, and small animals are arrayed
beneath a ceiling illuminated like a night sky. Two statues of
grotesquely fat and swollen-faced humans stand at the far end of the
room, one male and one female; both block the views of the discreetly
concealed doors in the corners.

Most prominent is the [now-extinct dire wolf ]{.Dungeon-Emphasis}at the
far end of the hall, which appears to be alive. It's actually the [soft
thrall beast Guzun-Thull]{.Monster-All-Caps} poorly mimicking a dire
wolf; Guzun-Thull clearly enunciates phrases like "growl growl" and
"snarl bark" while gazing with twitching, unblinking intensity at the
eastern door.

A [vine-wreathed undead]{.Dungeon-Emphasis}, [Pierre The plague
corpse]{.Monster-All-Caps} stands near an empty exhibit, muttering to
himself in old Court Riu. He is a refugee from the Second Establishment
who fled here after being infected by the Green Death, dying in this
room before rising as its permanent caretaker.

On noticing intruders, Pierre will express gratitude for their arrival,
for now an exhibit can be restored. He demands one of their number as a
replacement for the empty exhibit- preferably alive, but dead is
acceptable. If the PCs demur, he will accept some valuable surface
artifact instead, along with the promise to bring a replacement
candidate on their next visit. If the replacement is provided, the
plague corpse will gift the party with a golden Deepfolk bracer worth
250 sp. The only other item of value he possesses is Guzun-Thull's
control sigil, a beetle-seal marked with the thrall's name on the
obverse.

[Pierre The Plague Corpse ]{.Monster-All-Caps-Demi}(AC 10, HD 4, HP 25,
Atk +2, Dmg Special, No Shock, Skill +1, Morale 12, Instinct 2)

[Soft Thrall Beast Guzun-Thull ]{.Monster-All-Caps-Demi}(AC 13, HD 3, HP
15, Atk +4, Dmg1d6+2, No Shock, Skill +1, Morale 12, Instinct 4)

16.[ Beast-Tamer's
Chamber:]{.Early-Module-Character-Styles_EM-Heavy-Caps-Run-In
._idGenCharOverride-4} A sadistic [gobelin tamer
]{.Monster-All-Caps}[dwells here, currently busy torturing a fawn at the
eastern end of the room. A ]{.CharOverride-1}[young huntress in worn
leathers]{.Dungeon-Emphasis}[, ]{.CharOverride-1}[Elise of
Rossilhon]{.Monster-All-Caps}[, is tied up a few feet away from the
gobelin. The tamer is absorbed in his cruelties, but if he is alerted,
he will quickly move to threaten Elise with his bronze knife, swearing
to kill her if the PCs do not let him escape to the south. If the PCs
cooperate, he'll drag Elise with him, slitting her throat as soon as he
dares and shouting an alarm to his brethren in room 19 as he
flees.]{.CharOverride-1}

[If freed,]{.CharOverride-1} Elise will want her fellow captives in room
17 freed and then will seek to accompany the PCs in order to get her
revenge on the gobelins. She'll fight loyally without pay for this
foray, and will be a willing hireling for further expeditions. She's
brave and good with a bow, but tends to bristle at the "godless city
ways" of Castelnou folk.

[gobelin tamer ]{.Monster-All-Caps-Demi}(AC 13, HD 2, HP 10, Atk +3, Dmg
1d4+2 knife, Shock 3/15, Skill +1, Morale 10, Instinct 4)

[Elise of Rossilhon, ]{.Monster-All-Caps-Demi}(AC 10, HD 1, HP 6, Atk
+2, Dmg by weapon, Skill +1, Morale 9, Instinct 3)

17.[ Beast and Sacrifice
Cells:]{.Early-Module-Character-Styles_EM-Heavy-Caps-Run-In
._idGenCharOverride-4} Dull bars of unrusting alloy close off [filthy
cells for prisoners]{.Dungeon-Emphasis} taken in gobelin raids. Each one
is locked with keys held by the tamer in room 19. Cells A and B are
empty, but C is occupied by a [terrified young monk]{.Monster-All-Caps}
and D by a [weathered old hermit]{.Monster-All-Caps}. The monk will cry
out for rescue on noticing human presence; if not shut up within a few
rounds the tamer in room 19 will notice something amiss.

If freed, the monk will beg for an escort to Castelnou, but will flee
alone if he must, with an 80% chance of arriving alive. His survival
will incline Eveque-Abat Berengar to grant some small favor to the party
and perhaps consider them for other work. The hermit will bless the
character most responsible for freeing him; thanks to this blessing, the
next time the PC would die, they'll be miraculously spared by some
divine coincidence.

18.[ Dining Hall:]{.Early-Module-Character-Styles_EM-Heavy-Caps-Run-In
._idGenCharOverride-4} Lines of [massive stone
tables]{.Dungeon-Emphasis} run down the room, with low stone benches on
either side. Underneath one table, a long-dead inhabitant stuck a scroll
case to its bottom with sealing wax. It contains a spell scroll calyx
that casts a [Coruscating Coffin]{.Futura-PT-Demi-Oblique
.CharOverride-7} spell at the 3rd level of effect.

19.[ Barracks:]{.Early-Module-Character-Styles_EM-Heavy-Caps-Run-In
._idGenCharOverride-4} A mob of twelve [gobelin
warriors]{.Monster-All-Caps}[ ]{.CharOverride-1}lounge around this
barracks, half sleeping on filthy mounds of fur while the others mutter
quietly to each other or gnaw on the [two fresh human
corpses]{.Dungeon-Emphasis} in the center of the room, bandits from
Dirty Marta's gang. If alarmed, the active ones will kick their sleeping
brethren into action on the first round and attack on the second. They
will not pursue intruders far, fearing an ambush, and they have only 5
sp apiece of petty valuables and plunder.

[gobelin warriors ]{.Monster-All-Caps-Demi}(AC 12, HD 1, HP
8/7/6/5/4/4/4/4/3/3/2/1, Atk +1, Dmg 1d6 spear, Shock 2/13, Skill +0,
Morale 9, Instinct 3)

20.[ Armory:]{.Early-Module-Character-Styles_EM-Heavy-Caps-Run-In
._idGenCharOverride-4} A number of [empty hooks and
racks]{.Dungeon-Emphasis} once held the arms of those Deepfolk guards
assigned to this level. Their contents have been stolen long ago.

21.[ Pantry:]{.Early-Module-Character-Styles_EM-Heavy-Caps-Run-In
._idGenCharOverride-4} The gobelin pantry contains a [dozen sacks of
stolen grain]{.Dungeon-Emphasis} and looted foodstuffs, along with a
pair of small winecasks of an excellent vintage, each counting as five
items of encumbrance and worth 50 sp apiece. Above them, [a pair of
smoked children]{.Dungeon-Emphasis} hang from ceiling hooks as a dainty
for the next feast.

22.[ Captain's
Quarters:]{.Early-Module-Character-Styles_EM-Heavy-Caps-Run-In
._idGenCharOverride-4} The stench of hides and rotten meat fills this
room, the south end mounded with dirty furs and the north piled up with
a small heap of rubble. Atop the debris is a [two-foot silver
statue]{.Dungeon-Emphasis} of the blue sun goddess, her arms spread wide
and stylized rays of light emanating from her. Various choice pieces of
fresh human meat are spread out in offering before it. The statue itself
counts as five items of encumbrance but is worth 800 sp.

The half-mad [gobelin chief]{.Monster-All-Caps} has claimed this room
for his own. He is convinced that the power of his Fae lord can
transform the statue into a living bride if sufficient sacrifices are
offered, and he is desperate to find them. If intruders enter, he will
demand some precious token from them as tribute for the statue lest he
choose one of them for sacrifice. Those who give tribute will be allowed
to leave in peace, whereas prisoners the gobelins take will be kept in
the cells in room 17 and sacrificed weekly to the icon.

[gobelin chief ]{.Monster-All-Caps-Demi}(AC 15, HD 4, HP 15, Atk +4, Dmg
1d10+1 greatclub, Shock 3/15, Skill +1, Morale 10, Instinct 2)

23.[ Training Room:]{.Early-Module-Character-Styles_EM-Heavy-Caps-Run-In
._idGenCharOverride-4} The floor of this room is covered with a thick
layer of sand, and the walls are decorated with scarred funguswood
targets. If the sand is searched for at least two turns, a long-lost
[inerrant bolt ]{.Bold ._idGenCharOverride-5}of silvery alloy will be
found. This arrow fits any bow or crossbow and will automatically hit
its target for maximum damage. A non-magical bow is destroyed when
firing it, however, and the bolt shatters after hitting a target.

24.[ Ascent of the
Chosen:]{.Early-Module-Character-Styles_EM-Heavy-Caps-Run-In
._idGenCharOverride-4} The glowing blue sun glyphs lead past a [trio of
Deepfolk warrior statues]{.Dungeon-Emphasis}, each holding a different
weapon. From west to east they are a spear, a sword, and a mace.
Twisting the mace or spear shaft clockwise will lock the covered pit
trap for 24 hours. Otherwise, the first rank of the party must make
Evasion saves or fall 20 feet to suffer 2d6 damage. The foot of filthy
water that has accumulated at the bottom of the pit will drown
unconscious PCs in 1d6+4 rounds if they are not rescued. The statue
bases are pivoted so that any weight on them will cause them to pitch
forward and fall into the pit; those within must make Luck saves or be
crushed to death.

The spiral stair at the end of the hall winds downward by 100 feet
before emerging in room 1 on level 3.

First Level Wandering Encounters

Every turn in the dungeon the GM should roll 1d6 to check for Wandering
Encounters. On a 1, something happens near the PCs. This may not always
be a danger, but it's usually something the PCs have to respond to.

Monsters rolled for a Wandering Encounter usually show up from the
nearest entrance to the room. If the PCs are in a corridor, they
normally come around a nearby corner. Particularly loud or large groups
of wandering monsters might give the PCs a round of warning before they
come into sight.

If the same result is rolled more than once, roll again, unless the
result is something that could plausibly happen several times.
:::

::: _idGenObjectLayout-1
::: {#Diocesi_de_Montfroid_PDF.xhtml#_idContainer100}
![](image/MilonsEnd-Floor1_19x24.jpg){._idGenObjectAttribute-1
role="presentation"}
:::
:::

::: {#Diocesi_de_Montfroid_PDF.xhtml#_idContainer101 .Basic-Text-Frame}
[1 Square = 10']{.Futura-PT-Demi}
:::

::: {#Diocesi_de_Montfroid_PDF.xhtml#_idContainer102 .Basic-Text-Frame}
       Room
  ---- -----------------------------
  1    Entrance
  2    Regalia Storage
  3    Thrall Duty Post
  4    Garden of Promise
  5    Library
  6    Priest\'s Cenaculum
  7    Upper Priest Quarters
  8    Vestry
  9    Shrine to the Sapphire Sun
  10   Ritual Implement Storage
  11   Guard Duty Post
  12   Purification Room
  13   Procession of Glory
  14   Kitchen
  15   Hall of Upper-World Marvels
  16   Beast-Tamer's Chamber
  17   Beast and Sacrifice Cells
  18   Dining Hall
  19   Barracks
  20   Armory
  21   Pantry
  22   Captain's Quarters
  23   Training Room
  24   Ascent of the Chosen
:::

::: {#Diocesi_de_Montfroid_PDF.xhtml#_idContainer103 .Basic-Text-Frame}
  d10   Wandering Encounters on This Level
  ----- ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  1     2 [gobelin warriors]{.Monster-All-Caps}[ (AC 12, HD 1, Atk +1, Dmg 1d6 spear, Shock 2/13, Skill +0, Morale 9, Instinct 3)]{.CharOverride-1} are on patrol; if they detect intruders, they will immediately flee back to the closer of room 13 or room 19 in order to raise the alarm.
  2     The nearest glowing blue sun-glyphs briefly flare to a blindingly bright intensity; those within 30 feet must make a Physical save or be blinded for 1 turn and gain 1 System Strain from the alien radiance.
  3     A boneless [Soft Thrall]{.Monster-All-Caps} slowly oozes down the hallway, searching for a skeleton to wrap around and animate. It ignores intruders; if attacked, it will wetly beg for mercy in the Deepfolk tongue.
  4     A swarm of rats rushes through the area, feasting on any corpses present but ignoring live creatures capable of resistance. If attacked, they flee noisily.
  5     1d4+2 [gobelin warriors]{.Monster-All-Caps}[ (AC 12, HD 1, Atk +1, Dmg 1d6 spear, Shock 2/13, Skill +0, Morale 9, Instinct 3)]{.CharOverride-1} are on their way back to room 19 with a stolen sheep on a pole.
  6     A mastiff-sized [Cave Spider ]{.Monster-All-Caps}(AC 13, HD 2, HP 10, Atk +3, Dmg 1d6+Physical save or be Mortally Wounded by poison, No Shock, Skill +1, Morale 9, Instinct 4) starts stalking the PCs, hiding until one is wounded or weakened. It will flee after it downs a victim, and will press the attack only if the PCs try to steal its kill.
  7     A haggard peasant has escaped his gobelin captors and is trying to find a way out. He knows of the gobelin barracks in room 19 and the prisoners in room 17. He will not fight, but only seeks to flee.
  8     1d4+2 [gobelin warriors]{.Monster-All-Caps}[ (AC 12, HD 1, Atk +1, Dmg 1d6 spear, Shock 2/13, Skill +0, Morale 9, Instinct 3)]{.CharOverride-1} are on their way out of the Deep to raid the surface.
  9     A sudden fierce gust from the ventilation shafts blows out torches and unprotected lanterns.
  10    The PCs overhear echoes of the nearest inhabitants quarreling, fighting, or celebrating.
:::

::: _idGenObjectLayout-1
::: {#Diocesi_de_Montfroid_PDF.xhtml#_idContainer104}
![](image/MilonsEnd-Floor2_30x26.jpg){._idGenObjectAttribute-1
role="presentation"}
:::
:::

::: {#Diocesi_de_Montfroid_PDF.xhtml#_idContainer105 .Two-Column-Text}
[]{#Diocesi_de_Montfroid_PDF.xhtml#_idTextAnchor012}Level 2: Temple of
the Drowned Sun

1.[ Priestly Stair:]{.Early-Module-Character-Styles_EM-Heavy-Caps-Run-In
._idGenCharOverride-4} A pair of bluestone [statues in priestly
garb]{.Dungeon-Emphasis} flank the spiral stair here, hands lifted and
thin faces scowling. A litter of small bones lies at their feet, the
remnants of gobelin offerings of rats and other vermin.

2.[ Library:]{.Early-Module-Character-Styles_EM-Heavy-Caps-Run-In
._idGenCharOverride-4} The walls are lined with stone cubbyholes, most
empty, a few still holding verdigrised copper scrolls of religious
texts. A long reading table runs down the center of the room, and at its
far end, a [mummified sorcerer's corpse]{.Dungeon-Emphasis} sits gazing
on an opened copper scroll before him. The face of the scroll shines
with a bright blue light that illumines the corpse's withered features.

Any living creature who attempts to read the meaningless glyphs of the
scroll must make a Mental save or become enraptured by visions of a
magnificent world of cyclopean cities and black-leafed forests beneath a
blue sun. They will remain spellbound until dragged from the scroll's
light, gaining 1 System Strain each round and dying once it exceeds
their maximum. The scroll can be rolled up for safe transport; it counts
as 2 Encumbrance items. The third time it is unrolled, it will collapse
into powerless shreds.

The sorcerer's corpse can be pillaged for 43 sp worth of coins and a
moldy spellbook. Mages who study the book for one week can learn one
randomly-rolled first level High Magic spell before the pages fall
apart.

3.[ Clerical Cells:]{.Early-Module-Character-Styles_EM-Heavy-Caps-Run-In
._idGenCharOverride-4} Each of these austere cells contains a stone
sleeping platform, a low stone table, a funguswood bench, a stone
coffer, and a small stone idol of the blue sun goddess. The [walls are
all engraved with religious texts]{.Dungeon-Emphasis}; pressing the
correct verse will unlatch the secret door, which is obvious from the
other side of the wall. Any special contents of each cell are noted
below.

[a:]{.Futura-PT-Demi} [Sighild the Pagan]{.Monster-All-Caps} lairs here,
having fled her warband on level 4 after they renounced their Fae lord
in favor of the priest Marceau's blandishments and the blessings of the
Blue Sun. Amazonian, bronze-mailed, and painted over with pagan signs,
she still fears her lord's anger should she return alone to the Perdut.
Even so, she doubts her ability to survive the Deep unaided, as she's
almost come to the last of her dried manflesh and plundered bread. She
knows of the thrall passages behind the concealed doors on level 1 and
the stair down to level 4 in room 3, but has ventured no further than
this room. Her priority is her own survival at any cost, and she will
feign as much friendship as is necessary until she can figure out some
way to bring a sufficiently redeeming prize back east with her. She
respects only strength, but admires that greatly.

[Sighild the Pagan ]{.Monster-All-Caps-Demi}(AC 15 mail, HD 1, HP 7, Atk
+1, Dmg 1d6+1 spear, Shock 3/13, Skill +1, Morale 9, Instinct 3)

[b:]{.Futura-PT-Demi} Empty.

[c:]{.Futura-PT-Demi} Within this damp and mold-crusted chamber a patch
of [Corrosive Slime]{.Monster-All-Caps} hangs above the door. The first
PC who enters the cell without glancing above will have it fall on them
automatically. It does no damage the first round, but erodes and
destroys any worn leather, cloth, or metal armor on the second and
starts inflicting damage automatically on the third. It cannot be harmed
by weapons, but only by fire, frost, or arcane energies. A torch will do
1d4 damage to it with each hit but any damage in excess of that needed
to kill it will be done to the person it clings to. If it loses surprise
it can crawl only a few feet per minute and can pose no real danger.

[Corrosive Slime]{.Monster-All-Caps-Demi}[ ]{.Monster-All-Caps-Demi}(AC
10, HD 1, HP 4, Atk Special, Dmg 1d8 acid, Shock -, Skill +1, Morale 12,
Instinct 0)

[d:]{.Futura-PT-Demi} Empty.

[e:]{.Futura-PT-Demi} Empty.

[f:]{.Futura-PT-Demi} The secret door in this room was left open. The[
skeletal remains of a Deepfolk thrall]{.Dungeon-Emphasis} lie halfway
through the portal, the skull crushed by a heavy blow. The mold-stained
remnants of delicate spider-silks and intricate golden body ornaments
are spilled about it, the latter worth 200 sp.

[g:]{.Futura-PT-Demi} The door is wedged shut from within. If broken
down with two turns of chopping or smashing, the PCs will find the
[huddled bones of a Deepfolk priest]{.Dungeon-Emphasis} curled up in the
northwest corner, his vestments mouldered to rags.

4.[ Pantry:]{.Early-Module-Character-Styles_EM-Heavy-Caps-Run-In
._idGenCharOverride-4} Six [huge stone coffers]{.Dungeon-Emphasis} rest
here, three on the north wall and three on the south. Two on the north
have been smashed open and are empty. The other four are still lidded
with thick, pivoting slabs of rock and long-rusted locks that no longer
function. Breaking into them by brute force takes at least two turns per
coffer. All brim with ancient mounds of hardened filth, all that remains
of the foodstuffs that were once ritually guarded here by the kitchener.
If the southeastern most one is completely emptied, a single mislaid
blue gem-disc will be found, worth 25 sp, next to the beetle-sigil of
the Soft Thrall in room 7, his name inscribed on the back.

5.[ Kitchen:]{.Early-Module-Character-Styles_EM-Heavy-Caps-Run-In
._idGenCharOverride-4} A large stone oven rests against the south wall,
its green cooking-stone long since smashed by vandals. The walls are
carved with [images of the surface world]{.Dungeon-Emphasis}, the blue
sun depicted as shining down upon vast fields of wheat, herds of cattle,
and grotesquely fat surface humans. The latter two groups are shown
being methodically slaughtered and cooked by Deepfolk priests.

6.[ Triclinum:]{.Early-Module-Character-Styles_EM-Heavy-Caps-Run-In
._idGenCharOverride-4} A [dozen stone divans ]{.Dungeon-Emphasis}are
arranged in four groups of three here, one of them largely crushed by a
rockslide on the southern wall. The westmost group is raised on a low
platform, the spider-silk upholstery of the grandest still faintly
showing embroidered blue suns.

Within, a group of six [Pagan Raiders]{.Monster-All-Caps} are searching
for the traitor Sighild. While they wouldn't mind butchering some
Montfroiders on the way, their first priority is to find her and drag
her back to the warband. They may parley for information on her
whereabouts. They prefer death to betraying any information about the
Deep or their new god, for they are terrified of the Blue Sun's
vengeance in the afterlife. Together, they have 125 sp worth of coins
and trinkets plundered from the faithful.

[Pagan Raiders]{.Monster-All-Caps-Demi}[ ]{.Monster-All-Caps-Demi}(AC
12, HD 1, HP 7/5/5/4/4/2, Atk +1, Dmg 1d6 spear, Shock 2/13, Skill +1,
Morale 9, Instinct 3)

7.[ Kitchener's
Quarters:]{.Early-Module-Character-Styles_EM-Heavy-Caps-Run-In
._idGenCharOverride-4} The [Soft Thrall Walker
Tuvon-Lod]{.Monster-All-Caps} long ago enwrapped the bones of the
priestly kitchener. It has spent the centuries since inscribing [carved
Deepfolk recipes]{.Dungeon-Emphasis} on the walls, ones using only those
ingredients it can find on this level. Most of these recipes are
entirely inedible confections of rocks, fungus, stagnant water, and
worse.

If intruders enter, it will turn and demand a tribute of ingredients,
speaking in the Court Riu it learned from a long-dead master. If all
intruders offer an ingredient, it will then require that they cook a
single dish that utilizes all the offerings, using only such fuel and
implements as they brought with them. If any PCs refuse or attempt to
leave without satisfying Tuvon-Lod, it will attack until it has claimed
one of them as its latest ingredient.

If the PCs actually manage to cook something that isn't inedible,
Tuvon-Lod will instruct them to offer it to the Blue Sun in the temple
at room 17, advising them of the chant necessary to deactivate the altar
trap. If the meal is genuinely tasty, Tuvon-Lod will also give them a
serving-dish of translucent blue jade worth 500 sp in which to offer it
up.

[Walker Tuvon-Lod]{.Monster-All-Caps-Demi}[ ]{.Monster-All-Caps-Demi}(AC
15, HD 3, HP 18, Atk +3, Dmg 1d8+1, Shock 2/15, Skill +1, Morale 9,
Instinct 3)

8.[ Duty Room:]{.Early-Module-Character-Styles_EM-Heavy-Caps-Run-In
._idGenCharOverride-4} Deepfolk warriors once awaited temple duty here,
but now all that remains is the [Soft Thrall Abomination
Seven-Five-Gadak]{.Monster-All-Caps}, who stands ten feet behind the
eastern door. The massive figure of sinew, metal, and bone will remain
perfectly motionless until a non-Deepfolk steps into the room, whereupon
it will attack mindlessly until the intruders have left its field of
vision. [Even the greenest adventurers should be able to see that it is
a terrifying opponent before they choose to engage it.]{.CharOverride-7}
Seven-Five-Gadak will not leave room 8 unless it is attacked from
outside the room, whereupon it will give chase for 1d4 further rounds.

[Abomination Seven-Five-Gadak]{.Monster-All-Caps-Demi}[
]{.Monster-All-Caps-Demi}(AC 15, HD 5, HP 30, Atk +6 x2, Dmg 1d8+2,
Shock 4/-, Skill +1, Morale 12, Instinct 5)

9.[ Templar Captain's
Chamber:]{.Early-Module-Character-Styles_EM-Heavy-Caps-Run-In
._idGenCharOverride-4} The door to this room is locked. Breaking it down
violently will draw the attention of the abomination in room 8, but
picking the lock quietly will escape its notice. Within, a raised stone
sleeping platform is in the southwest corner, and a litter of smashed
and looted funguswood cabinets and tables fills the rest of the room.
Amid the debris, a tarnished silver ceremonial mace would be worth 400
sp if cleaned.

10.[ Templar
Antechamber:]{.Early-Module-Character-Styles_EM-Heavy-Caps-Run-In
._idGenCharOverride-4} The spiral stairway here winds down 50 feet to
room 3 on level 3. The walls depict [images of spear-wielding Deepfolk
settlers ]{.Dungeon-Emphasis}driving herds of obese surface humans
before them, a towering blue goddess commanding them forth.

11.[ Armory:]{.Early-Module-Character-Styles_EM-Heavy-Caps-Run-In
._idGenCharOverride-4} Funguswood racks hold rows of mostly-ruined
Deepfolk weaponry. The corroded remains of short, broad-bladed spears,
vicious picks, and narrow-bladed shortswords hang on the pegs. A single
perfectly-intact [shortsword +1]{.Dungeon-Emphasis} lies beneath a
fallen rack, its edge still sharp after millenia of neglect.

12.[ Ritual
Storage:]{.Early-Module-Character-Styles_EM-Heavy-Caps-Run-In
._idGenCharOverride-4} Piles of identical clay offering-platters are
stacked here amid damp-mouldered cones of fungal incense, hardened
ceremonial body paints, and festering lumps of rotted ritual vestments.

13.[ Dry Bath:]{.Early-Module-Character-Styles_EM-Heavy-Caps-Run-In
._idGenCharOverride-4} A [waist-deep stone basin]{.Dungeon-Emphasis} is
set in the center of this former bathing chamber, the whole 10' wide and
25' long. The basin is filled almost to the brim with a [nacreous,
glossy-skinned fungal mass ]{.Dungeon-Emphasis}that shimmers with
opalescent light. If touched even lightly, the mass will erupt into a
blinding cloud of glowing spores, inflicting 1d4 System Strain on anyone
in the room or directly outside the doorway. Such victims will be
covered with the glowing spores, which will emit torch-bright radiance
until killed by exposure to sunlight. For each two hours a victim
remains covered they gain another System Strain point, dying and
becoming fungus-fodder if the total exceeds their Constitution.

The walls of the bath are carved with [images of Deepfolk priests making
offerings]{.Dungeon-Emphasis} to the city god, the Old Lords, and the
Blue Sun herself. The latter is depicted as leaning down and snatching
up a corpulent surface-human sacrifice from her altar.

14.[ High Priest's
Chamber:]{.Early-Module-Character-Styles_EM-Heavy-Caps-Run-In
._idGenCharOverride-4} The door to this chamber is locked, and will take
at least two turns to chop through if violence is employed. Within,
nothing remains but a stone sleeping platform and the damp, fetid
remnants of voluminous drapes and hangings.

15.[ High Priest's
Chapel:]{.Early-Module-Character-Styles_EM-Heavy-Caps-Run-In
._idGenCharOverride-4} A [human-sized idol of the goddess of the Blue
Sun ]{.Dungeon-Emphasis}stands against the eastern wall, a fresh
offering of a human head laid before it. From the paint and hairstyle,
the victim appears to have been a pagan, one of the warband below.

Corroded copper scrolls of obscure god-building theology are stacked in
cubbies on either side of the shrine. A much newer codex of parchment
and leather has been abandoned next to a dusty writing kit. Its contents
are a Court Riu analysis of the Deepfolk language by a long-vanished
explorer of the Deep; with a month of determined study of the book,
someone with at least Know-0 skill could obtain basic fluency in the
language.

16.[ Altars to the Old
Lords:]{.Early-Module-Character-Styles_EM-Heavy-Caps-Run-In
._idGenCharOverride-4} Four [hideous altars to monstrous
idols]{.Dungeon-Emphasis} stand on either side of the room. Beetle-like
Jikegida, Polop fishmen, and stranger Outsiders are depicted on the
altars and walls, all of them being reverently served by Deepfolk
priests and surface-human sacrifices.

An empty throne rises at the far end of the room, the proportions wrong
for a human user. Should any human be insolent enough to sit on it, the
throne will fold rapidly on itself to pulp the blasphemer unless they
succeed in an Evasion saving throw.

17.[ Temple of the Blue
Sun:]{.Early-Module-Character-Styles_EM-Heavy-Caps-Run-In
._idGenCharOverride-4} A set of four bluestone braziers shine with
heatless azure light in this room, casting watery shadows on curtains of
woven wire. A [large altar]{.Dungeon-Emphasis} of similar material
stands before a thirty-foot-tall [statue of the goddess of the Blue
Sun]{.Dungeon-Emphasis}, the latter wrought in a steel-hard alloy that
shines midnight blue in the light of the braziers. The idol's
proportions are soft and somewhat overfed, but her face has the same
hollow-cheeked symmetry seen on other Deepfolk statues.

On the altar, a set of shining [golden serving platters
]{.Dungeon-Emphasis}worth 2,000 sp appear to be speckled with dark
spatters of dried blood. Careful inspection will show the statue's right
hand and mouth is likewise smeared, though it's difficult to see against
the dark metal.

Before touching the altar or anything on it, a petitioner must say "From
on high to on highest. From new earth to new heavens. Blue Sun, receive
our offering." in the Deepfolk tongue. After saying this, the petitioner
has one round in which it is safe to touch the altar or remove its
vessels.

If this prayer is omitted and the altar or its furnishings are touched,
or if a food offering is made, or if the idol itself is violently
struck, the statue will reach down with a hideous, spider-like quickness
to unavoidably snatch up the profaner or the offering in a crushing
grasp. It will then swallow the pulped mass whole. It can devour only
one blasphemer a round, however, and will only keep eating so long as
intruders continue to offend. Touching the altar with poles or other
objects still counts as profanation, but the statue can reach only
thirty feet into the room. This range is suggested by scrape-marks left
on the floor, the marks noticeable to investigators who look carefully.
Vessels knocked off the altar by arrows or hurled items are damaged to
half value but can be picked up without risk.

18.[ Fane of the
God-City:]{.Early-Module-Character-Styles_EM-Heavy-Caps-Run-In
._idGenCharOverride-4} This [room is partially
flooded]{.Dungeon-Emphasis}, a slow leak in the ceiling and a partial
collapse in the floor creating a large pool of black, acrid-smelling
liquid studded with pale stalagmites that reach almost to the 20'
ceiling above. Anyone who enters the waist-deep corrosive fluid will
suffer 1d4 damage per round and have their movement rate halved for one
day due to the pain of their burns. Even slight contact with the liquid
is enough to provide a warning throb of pain. The liquid quickly burns
through any organic matter or armor, but ignores stone and metal. If the
liquid is removed from the pool, it loses its qualities in 24 hours.

The floor and walls of the chamber are carved to depict a massive
underground cityscape, with vast walls of hive-like dwellings stacked on
each other, all climbing higher and higher toward the eastern side of
the room until they come together into a [massive idol-pillar of carved
stone habitations]{.Dungeon-Emphasis}.

A humanoid skeleton can be seen sprawled at the foot of the idol pillar,
an unwary explorer who perished of his burns. A pack is visible beside
the skeleton, the gleam of gold from within. PCs who reach the pack will
find golden ritual vessels within worth 600 sp, plus two
carefully-corked potion bottles, one red and the other blue, with their
effects noted in Court Riu on parchment slips wrapped about them. The
red one allows the drinker to pass through stone for 1d4 rounds
unhindered, though they will die if the effect ends while they are in
any degree immured. The blue one must be thrown like a grenade; where it
spills, all noise is nullified in a ten-pace radius for 1d4 minutes,
making vocal spellcasting impossible within the area. If the vial is
used to soak a person or object, the silent radius moves with them.

19.[ Thrall's
Stair:]{.Early-Module-Character-Styles_EM-Heavy-Caps-Run-In
._idGenCharOverride-4} A spiral stairway in the corner circles down 100
feet to room 2 on level 4. The steps are chipped and worn as if from the
dragging of heavy objects up and down the stair.

20.[ Service
Storage:]{.Early-Module-Character-Styles_EM-Heavy-Caps-Run-In
._idGenCharOverride-4} The damply mouldering remains of ancient brooms
and brushes lie on stone shelves, black spiderbristles and mummified
funguswood heaped in soft piles. Other tools of thankfully
incomprehensible purpose lie next to a half-collapsed cabinet full of
the remnants of gauzy spider-silk negligees, thongs, and stranger
couture. The golden bangles and ornaments lying beneath the layer of
filth on the cabinet floor are worth 500 sp, however. The iconography
they depict is so debauched, however, that no respectable jeweler in
Montfroid will buy them. Melted down, they are worth but a fifth as
much.

Second Level Wandering Encounters

The chief perils on the second level are wandering pagan raiders
searching for Sighild and the fungal hazards of this damp floor. Even
so, a few monstrous creatures have climbed down from the first floor as
well.
:::

::: {#Diocesi_de_Montfroid_PDF.xhtml#_idContainer106 .Basic-Text-Frame}
[1 Square = 10']{.Futura-PT-Demi}
:::

::: {#Diocesi_de_Montfroid_PDF.xhtml#_idContainer107 .Basic-Text-Frame}
       Room
  ---- ---------------------------
  1    Priestly Stair
  2    Library
  3    Clerical Cells
  4    Pantry
  5    Kitchen
  6    Triclinum
  7    Kitchener's Quarters
  8    Duty Room
  9    Templar Captain's Chamber
  10   Templar Antechamber
  11   Armory
  12   Ritual Storage
  13   Dry Bath
  14   High Priest's Chamber
  15   High Priest's Chapel
  16   Altars to the Old Lords
  17   Temple of the Blue Sun
  18   Fane of the God-City
  19   Thrall's Stair
  20   Service Storage
:::

::: {#Diocesi_de_Montfroid_PDF.xhtml#_idContainer108 .Basic-Text-Frame}
  d8   Wandering Encounters on This Level
  ---- -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  1    1d4+2 [Pagan Raiders ]{.Monster-All-Caps}[(AC 12, HD 1, Atk +1, Dmg 1d6 spear, Shock 2/13, Skill +1, Morale 9, Instinct 3)]{.CharOverride-1} are looking for Sighild, and might parley for knowledge of her whereabouts.
  2    The party's intended path forward is blocked by a mass of damp, swollen fungus. It extinguishes fire instantly, and will take 1d4 turns to chop through.
  3    A mastiff-sized [Cave Spider ]{.Monster-All-Caps}(AC 13, HD 2, HP 10, Atk +3, Dmg 1d6+Physical save or be Mortally Wounded by poison, No Shock, Skill +1, Morale 9, Instinct 4) starts stalking the PCs, hiding until one is wounded or weakened. It will flee after it downs a victim, and will press the attack only if the PCs try to steal its kill.
  4    The [soft thrall beast]{.Monster-All-Caps}[ ]{.CharOverride-1}[Yod-Jhaal]{.Monster-All-Caps}[ (AC 13, HD 3, HP 15, Atk +4, Dmg1d6+2, No Shock, Skill +1, Morale 12, Instinct 4) has squeezed itself into the exoskeletal husk of a dead cave spider and clumsily mimics its behavior, saying "chitter chitter" and "I will bite you." in the Court Riu it learned from an old victim. Its chief concern is acting as it thinks a cave spider should, but most of its thoughts are wrong. ]{.CharOverride-1}
  5    The party stumbles across the remains of a fight, two dead pagan raiders slain by their fellows' bronze spears. They've been butchered like meat animals by the hungry apostates.
  6    1d4+2 [gobelin warriors]{.Monster-All-Caps}[ (AC 12, HD 1, Atk +1, Dmg 1d6 spear, Shock 2/13, Skill +0, Morale 9, Instinct 3)]{.CharOverride-1} have ventured down in search of fresh loot or fresh meat.
  7    A cloud of invisible spores chokes and stifles the PCs. Each must make a Physical save or gain 1d2 System Strain and lose their Move action each round for the next 1d4 turns.
  8    The PCs' intended path leads through an ankle-deep slime of water and fungus. If they pass through it, they need at least a turn to scrub it off their boots or they have a 1in 6 chance of slipping and falling prone during each round of combat for the next 6 turns.
:::

::: {#Diocesi_de_Montfroid_PDF.xhtml#_idContainer109 .Two-Column-Text}
[]{#Diocesi_de_Montfroid_PDF.xhtml#_idTextAnchor013}Level 3: Salle of
the Pioneers

1.[ Ascent of the
Chosen:]{.Early-Module-Character-Styles_EM-Heavy-Caps-Run-In
._idGenCharOverride-4} The blue-litten sun glyphs of room 24 on floor 1
continue north from the stairway here, but a [huge
rockfall]{.Dungeon-Emphasis} has blocked the path to the stairway down.
Statues of Deepfolk warriors stand in the corners of the room,
thin-faced and lifting sickles and hammers in their stone hands. The
walls are carved with images of Deepfolk pioneers building cyclopean
structures of stone and slaying vast legions of bloated surface humans.
On the west wall, a pair of heavy bronze doors lie slightly ajar.

2.[ The Straight
Path:]{.Early-Module-Character-Styles_EM-Heavy-Caps-Run-In
._idGenCharOverride-4} The north and south walls of this room are
decorated with [golden inlays]{.Dungeon-Emphasis}, each one depicting
the goddess of the Blue Sun with outspread hands. There is 1,000 sp
worth of gold in the inlays, but it takes a turn for one person to
chisel out 100 sp worth, assuming they have adequate tools.

There are [four covered pit traps]{.Dungeon-Emphasis} arranged in front
of the inlaid walls. Each one is hinged on a pivot next to the wall and
will swing down to dump any unwary pillager into a pit before rising
back into place. The victim gets an Evasion save to jump back. The pit's
cover requires at least fifty pounds of weight on it to trigger.

The pit itself is thirty feet deep, but fortunately, the bottom twenty
feet of it are packed with the crumbling yellow bones of prior victims,
allowing a PC to take only 1d6 damage from the fall. The ravenous
corpse-beetles at the bottom of the pit will be alerted, however, and a
victim has only 1d4+1 rounds before a rustling, clicking swarm engulfs
them, inflicting 1d6 damage per round until no more than bones remain.
The beetles can't climb out of the pit.

3.[ Assembly Room:]{.Early-Module-Character-Styles_EM-Heavy-Caps-Run-In
._idGenCharOverride-4} A pair of [glowing stone spheres
]{.Dungeon-Emphasis}flank the stairway up to room 10 on level 2, their
blue radiance equal to that of a torch. They are inset into the wall and
cannot be removed intact.

4.[ Armory:]{.Early-Module-Character-Styles_EM-Heavy-Caps-Run-In
._idGenCharOverride-4} The dry-rotted remnants of numerous spears,
crossbows, suits of beetle-chitin armor, and other Deepfolk goods lie
ankle-deep in this room, all plundered repeatedly in past centuries.
Those who sift through the debris have a 20% chance of being bitten by
one of the numerous palm-long centipedes that scuttle below the
wreckage; the bites sting and swell ominously and add 1 System Strain to
the victim.

The secret door to the room is positioned behind a partially-ruined
weapon rack, and swings out when the rack is pulled forward. It is
obvious from the other side.

5.[ Lieutenant's
Quarters:]{.Early-Module-Character-Styles_EM-Heavy-Caps-Run-In
._idGenCharOverride-4} Debris and scraps of rotted cloth have been
arranged in mimicry of living quarters here to form a lair for the [Soft
Thrall Walker Gubal-Yot]{.Monster-All-Caps} (AC 15, HD 4, HP 20, Atk +4,
Dmg 1d8+2, Shock 3/-, Skill +1, Morale 10, Instinct 3). The Soft Walker
has infested the bones of the former Lieutenant of Pioneers Meshluq and
adopted her shape, appearing as a lank, red-eyed Deepfolk woman dressed
in beetle-chitin armor and bearing an iron mace. It is fiercely jealous
of the Soft Thrall who has taken over the bones of Pioneer Master Nomlaq
in room 7 and desires the privilege of "wearing" such august remains
instead. It will give its treasures to any who bring it Nomlaq's bones
unencumbered by their current possessor's flesh. Like all Soft Thralls
on this level, "Meshluq" speaks Court Riu learned from prior victims.

Beneath the rags mounded on the stone sleeping platform lie three
treasures.

A [purse of small blue gem discs]{.Dungeon-Emphasis} that served as
money here once, the pouch containing 30 of the gems worth 25 sp each.

A [bottle containing a single dose of liquid
slave-scourge]{.Dungeon-Emphasis} lies next to it, the acrid,
bitter-tasting fluid forcing any Soft Thrall touched by it to make a
Physical save or lose its Main Action for 1d4 rounds. On a success, it
loses only its next Main Action.

A [ceremonial mace of gold]{.Dungeon-Emphasis} worth 1,000 sp that is
useless in combat but can be presented to gain a +1 bonus to Reaction
Rolls made by Soft Thralls in the Deep, who will feel a subtle,
instinctual urge to defer to the bearer.

6.[ Master's
Office:]{.Early-Module-Character-Styles_EM-Heavy-Caps-Run-In
._idGenCharOverride-4} The walls are lined with [innumerable stone
cubbies]{.Dungeon-Emphasis}, and the center of the room is dominated by
a large stone desk and chair. Every single cubby is packed solid with
rolls of parchment, papers, cloth, rotting hide, thin wood, fungal
leather, and anything else that could conceivably serve as a writing
medium. Every sheet is densely covered by gibberish scrawled in dried
blood.

If 1d4 turns are spent searching the cubbies, the beetle-sigil of
control for the Soft Thrall in room 5 will be found. "Pioneer Master
Nomlaq" will happen to enter from room 7 in 1d4 turns, however, and will
be furious at any disordering of his "archives".

7.[ Master's
Bedchamber:]{.Early-Module-Character-Styles_EM-Heavy-Caps-Run-In
._idGenCharOverride-4} The bones that Pioneer Master Nomlaq left here
are inhabited by the [Soft Thrall Walker Kolek-BOC]{.Monster-All-Caps}
(AC 15, HD 4, HP 20, Atk +4, Dmg 1d8+2, Shock 3/-, Skill +1, Morale 10,
Instinct 3), who appears as a scarred and red-eyed Deepfolk warrior with
a pickaxe at his belt. Tied by thongs to the far wall is a man-sized
[GIANT CENTIPEDE ]{.Monster-All-Caps}(AC 13, HD 2, HP 10, Atk +3, Dmg
1d6+save vs. Physical or gain 1d4 System Strain, Shock N/A, Skill +1,
Morale 8, Instinct 4) wearing a wig made out of the flayed blonde scalp
of a pagan warrior. The Soft Thrall is dimly aware that Nomlaq is
supposed to have a concubine, and so addresses the flailing arthropod it
captured as "beautiful Lin".

The Soft Thrall will immediately demand that all intruders "present
their reports". It is aware that the intruders are not actually
Deepfolk, but does not care so long as it is given some sort of written
matter. As Kolek-Boc cannot read, any text will do so long as each PC
presents something. If denied, Kolek-Boc will attempt to take their
hides as additional writing materials, using a Move Action to loosen the
centipede's bonds and urging it to "flee, my beloved!". The berserk
creature will attack any PCs that stand between it and flight, as it is
terrified of Kolek-Boc.

8.[ Barracks:]{.Early-Module-Character-Styles_EM-Heavy-Caps-Run-In
._idGenCharOverride-4} Stone bunk beds stand in rows in this room, all
thick with dust and the stains of decay. [Knee-tall stone
jars]{.Dungeon-Emphasis} rest between the bunk beds, a dozen of them in
various shapes, all lidded and grouted shut. On the west side of the
room, [a single ornate silver jar]{.Dungeon-Emphasis} stands against the
west wall.

Standing just east of the entry door is the [Soft Thrall Abomination
Thirteen-Two-Nimtok]{.Monster-All-Caps}[ positioned so that the PCs must
enter the room to see it.]{.CharOverride-1}

[Nimtok will not respond to mere intrusion, keeping its bulging eyes
fixed on the largest group in the room at all times. If the party breaks
up into multiple groups of the same size, it will glance between the
groups, but it will otherwise entirely ignore single individuals or
smaller gatherings unless its attention is drawn by loud noises or
attacks. It is too alert to be subject to Execution Attacks and it will
defend itself if assaulted.]{.CharOverride-1}

[The sealed jars all contain various Soft Thralls who offended Pioneer
Master Nomlaq, who "confined them to barracks" centuries ago and sealed
their boneless bodies within the jars. If it sees the PCs approach a
jar, the abomination will raise its bladed limbs threateningly; it will
attack if sees the PCs touch or tamper with the vessels, and will
continue to do so until the PCs drop any stolen vessels and
flee.]{.CharOverride-1}

[The ornate silver jar is very heavy, weighing 10 items of encumbrance
when occupied and 5 items when empty. It is worth 750
sp.]{.CharOverride-1}

[The Soft Thralls within the jars are helpless without bones to enfold,
and can do nothing but weep piteously if poured from their
"cells".]{.CharOverride-1}

[Thirteen-Two-Nimtok]{.Monster-All-Caps-Demi}[ ]{.Monster-All-Caps-Demi
.CharOverride-1}[(AC 15, HD 5, HP 34, Atk +7 x2, Dmg 1d8+4, Shock 5/-,
Skill +1, Morale 12, Instinct 5)]{.CharOverride-1}

9.[ Shrine to the Blue
Sun:]{.Early-Module-Character-Styles_EM-Heavy-Caps-Run-In
._idGenCharOverride-4} A ten-foot [idol of the goddess of the Blue Sun
]{.Dungeon-Emphasis}stands with hands outstretched at the far end of the
room, flanked by wire-woven curtains and looming over a rectangular
altar below. Her face shines with a flickering, intermittent blue glow
that casts long shadows in the shrine. A [faintly luminous blue liquid
]{.Dungeon-Emphasis}drips from a crack on the side of the idol's head,
dripping down an arm to pool on the concave surface of the altar before
the statue.

The liquid is thin, sticky, and odorless, with enough pooling on the
altar to fill a waterskin. The energies of the Blue Sun are toxic to
surface humans, however, and unless the liquid is kept in a ceramic,
glass, or metal container, anyone who gets within ten feet of it will
begin to accumulate System Strain at the rate of 1 point per hour. This
gain will not be noticed unless the victim gains System Strain from some
other source, or until their Strain maximizes and they pass out. An
unconscious victim still affected by the miasma will die in one hour.

If safely contained or handled with due caution a waterskin full of the
liquid can be used as one unit of arcane salvage for gear modification
purposes, or 1,000 sp worth of ingredients for magic item creation. The
statue generates one waterskin of the fluid every six months.

The concealed door in this room is hidden by a fold of the wire-woven
curtains, and its presence will be obvious if the drapes are pulled
back.

10.[ Vestry:]{.Early-Module-Character-Styles_EM-Heavy-Caps-Run-In
._idGenCharOverride-4} The only furniture in this room is a [large
funguswood wardrobe]{.Dungeon-Emphasis} opposite the southern door. A
soft, orange-colored mold oozes from between the closed doors of the
wardrobe. If the doors are opened, the mold within will burst in a cloud
of spores that fills the room; all within gain 2 System Strain and must
make a Physical save or go blind for 1d6 turns. The spores will settle
after two turns. There is nothing of value within the wardrobe.

On the west wall, a concealed door is obvious to any close inspection.
On the north wall, the secret door can only be opened from this side by
sliding a panel on the side of the wardrobe; on the other side the
door's operation is obvious.

11.[ Storeroom:]{.Early-Module-Character-Styles_EM-Heavy-Caps-Run-In
._idGenCharOverride-4} This shrine storeroom is used as a dumping ground
by the Abomination Eight-Five-Vomal noted as wandering encounter #1 on
this level. The remains of all it catches are deposited here eventually,
leaving a [chest-deep tangle of bones]{.Dungeon-Emphasis} and a thick,
gummy crust of corpse-ichor covering the floor.

For each turn spent searching the remains, there is a 1 in 6 chance of
finding one of the following four treasures amid the remains, randomly
chosen each time. A treasure can only be found once.

1\) A silver thorned rod fashioned in the sign holy to the Bleeding God,
bent as if from a tremendous blow and worth 200 sp.

2\) A jeweled breastplate that has been smashed flat, with the remaining
gems worth 500 sp.

3\) An antique Courontine shield that glows as brightly as a torch the
first time each day it is readied. The glow lasts until the shield is
dropped or stowed.

4\) In a pouch of broken vials, a [philtre of gambler's
fortune]{.Dungeon-Emphasis} remains unbroken. Once quaffed, the user
will inevitably win the next game of chance they are involved in, with
the effect fading at the next dawn.

Each turn the PCs spend searching the bones, there is a 1 in 6 chance
that Eight-Five-Vomal will be heard approaching from room 10, if it has
not been destroyed already.

12.[ Thrall's
Stair:]{.Early-Module-Character-Styles_EM-Heavy-Caps-Run-In
._idGenCharOverride-4} The slaves of the Deep used this spiral stair to
reach room 1 on level 4, and the adjacent corridors were used as
discreet highways for getting into places without offending their
betters with their visible presence. All of the concealed and secret
doors along this passageway are obvious from the passage's side of the
wall. A long stone stair to room 27 descends the 30 feet of depth that
separates the upper portion of this level from the lower area.

13.[ Priest's
Quarters:]{.Early-Module-Character-Styles_EM-Heavy-Caps-Run-In
._idGenCharOverride-4} A crumbling nest of decayed furs lies atop the
stone sleeping platform here, and a number of crude woven baskets have
been torn and thrown about. Against the north wall, [a tangle of bones
are nailed to the wall ]{.Dungeon-Emphasis}by verdigrised bronze knives.
Pagan graffiti mocking the Bleeding God has been scratched into the
stone beside the remains.

14.[ Private
Shrine:]{.Early-Module-Character-Styles_EM-Heavy-Caps-Run-In
._idGenCharOverride-4} Whatever idol once stood at the north end of this
room has been replaced by a [brown-stained icon of the Bleeding
God]{.Dungeon-Emphasis} in the shape of a thorned rod. A rotting wooden
box beneath the altar holds three palm-sized manuscripts full of
heretical writing, the author maintaining that the Fae are no more than
the rightful scourges of God upon the inescapable wickedness of
humanity, and that only meek submission as the pagans do can bring peace
in this life and paradise in the next. From events mentioned in the
text, it seems as if the books were written about sixty years ago.

Anyone who spends at least an hour reading the texts will find the names
of several pagan sympathizers identified by the author. Most were of no
importance, but Baron Sicard's uncle Remy is credited with helping the
author set a pagan warband upon a troublesome merchant's caravan. The
baron of Nouvila would be very glad if this well-detailed evidence of
his deceased uncle's treachery were to be safely destroyed.

15.[ Dining Hall:]{.Early-Module-Character-Styles_EM-Heavy-Caps-Run-In
._idGenCharOverride-4} The walls are lined with [hideous carvings of
Deepfolk warriors]{.Dungeon-Emphasis} feasting on fallen surface humans.
[Yellowed, half-crumbled skulls]{.Dungeon-Emphasis} are arranged in rows
atop stone shelves that run around the periphery of the room. Three long
stone tables with matching stone benches run down the center of the
dining hall, each thickly covered in bone dust. [The air is electric
with a vengeful malice that even the dullest adventurer can
sense.]{.CharOverride-1}

If any of the skulls are touched, the PC who does so must make a Mental
save. On a failure, they have been secretly and subtly possessed by a
spirit of a former victim. The PC will feel nothing unusual, but
whenever they encounter a Deepfolk or Soft Thrall, they will driven to
immediately attack the target, and they cannot voluntarily cease combat
until their prey is dead. A possessed victim can be cleansed of the
spirit by a week of devout prayer in a church or eating at least a
mouthful of Deepfolk or Soft Thrall flesh.

16.[ Walk of Honor:]{.Early-Module-Character-Styles_EM-Heavy-Caps-Run-In
._idGenCharOverride-4} Three [statues of deepfolk warriors
]{.Dungeon-Emphasis}stand against the eastern wall, each depicting a
former Pioneer Master. The northern one stands atop the corpse of a
corpulent surface human warrior, the center one lifts a glowing blue
sphere, and the southern one has hands filled with sheaves of
carefully-carved grain. The sphere casts light as a torch but will
gutter out if chipped free.

17.[ Changing Room:]{.Early-Module-Character-Styles_EM-Heavy-Caps-Run-In
._idGenCharOverride-4} The walls are lined with [rectangular stone
niches]{.Dungeon-Emphasis} where training uniforms once hung. A few
mummified piles of debris are all that remain of them. The stairway to
the south steeply descends 30 feet to the lower southeastern quadrant of
the level.

18.[ Sauna:]{.Early-Module-Character-Styles_EM-Heavy-Caps-Run-In
._idGenCharOverride-4} The constant torrent of steamy heat within has
swollen and stuck the doors to this room. PCs who force their way in
will find the [steam too thick to see through]{.Dungeon-Emphasis}, and
may fall into the [open thermal vent]{.Dungeon-Emphasis} in the
southeast corner. The vent is approximately three feet in diameter, its
stone grate long since collapsed. A PC who is searching the room has a 1
in 6 chance of falling in unless they specifically mention something
about feeling their way along the floor or otherwise take special
caution. Those who fall get an Evasion save to catch themselves, lest
they plunge to a scalding doom.

19.[ Baths:]{.Early-Module-Character-Styles_EM-Heavy-Caps-Run-In
._idGenCharOverride-4} A [constant stream of water]{.Dungeon-Emphasis}
pours from the a font in the ceiling of this room into a[ waist-deep
basin ]{.Dungeon-Emphasis}running down the center of the room.
Unfortunately, the drains have long since been choked by filth, so PCs
who manage to lever up the iron bars on the outward-swinging metal doors
of the room will be swept away by a torrential deluge as the waist-high
trapped water escapes. The only hint of the danger is the [extremely
wet, corroded condition of both doors]{.Dungeon-Emphasis} that connect
to this room.

PCs caught in the torrent will likely be washed all the way into room
23, and the entire lower section of this level from the baths to room 28
will be left in ankle-deep water for a month. PCs who are swept away
must make a Str/Exert swimming skill check at difficulty 8 to keep from
being slammed into walls and bounced off floors, suffering 2d6
non-lethal damage on a failure.

20.[ Classroom:]{.Early-Module-Character-Styles_EM-Heavy-Caps-Run-In
._idGenCharOverride-4} A [low dais at the north end of the room
]{.Dungeon-Emphasis}is surmounted by a podium. A dozen rows of low stone
benches stretch all the way to the southern door. [Manacles hang from
the western and eastern walls]{.Dungeon-Emphasis}, the cuffs positioned
to leave a human-sized victim's feet dangling at least a foot above the
floor. Deepfolk graffiti is carved unobtrusively into the soft stone of
the benches, most of it deriding the inadequate height of the teacher,
complaining about the inaccuracy of the lessons, or praying to the Blue
Sun for protection from the curse of the Yellow Eye.

21.[ Library:]{.Early-Module-Character-Styles_EM-Heavy-Caps-Run-In
._idGenCharOverride-4} The [thin metal scrolls]{.Dungeon-Emphasis} of
the Deepfolk line cubbies in the walls, the vast majority reduced to
uselessness by time and corrosion. One abnormally intact scroll can be
found with one turn of searching, and its mystic inscriptions can be
recited as a [calyx of Decree of Ligneous
Dissolution]{.Dungeon-Emphasis} cast as a 5th level caster. The reader
must be able to read the Deepfolk script, however.

22.[ Sage's
Quarters:]{.Early-Module-Character-Styles_EM-Heavy-Caps-Run-In
._idGenCharOverride-4} A long stone table lines the west wall, heavy
with[ glass alembics, corroded copper vessels, stone mortars, and other
alchemical equipment]{.Dungeon-Emphasis}. Someone with at least Magic-0
or Trade-0 skill can identify up to 10 encumbrance points of valuable
glassware, each worth 50 sp. If the bearer falls or is knocked prone,
however, the vessels will smash into worthless shards. The only other
furnishings in the room are a low stone sleeping platform and a paired
stone desk and chair.

An empty cell once contained the next candidate for Deepfolk
vivisection, but now its barred door hangs open. Ancient scorchmarks and
still-brilliant alchemical stains cover the floor, along with a thin
sifting of almost completely-consumed bone fragments.

23.[ Training
Ground:]{.Early-Module-Character-Styles_EM-Heavy-Caps-Run-In
._idGenCharOverride-4} Shin-deep [white sand covers the
floor]{.Dungeon-Emphasis} of this training ground, old stains of blood
crusted here and there. Five tall stone archways allow passage to the
adjacent chambers and halls.

If a human gets more than ten feet distant from a wall, the sand will
churn upward as [Twelve Animated skeletons ]{.Monster-All-Caps}erupt
from beneath the sand to seek a jealous vengeance against the living.
They wield rusted blades and corroded knives and will preferentially
target downed PCs so as to kill them before moving to fresh targets. It
takes a Main Action for a skeleton to free itself from the sand, and
they will not leave the room unless attacked from outside of it.

[Animated skeletons]{.Monster-All-Caps-Demi}[[
]{.Monster-All-Caps}]{.Monster-All-Caps-Demi}(AC 14, HD 1, HP all 5, Atk
+2, Dmg1d4+2, Shock 1/13, Skill +1, Morale 12, Instinct 4)

24.[ Vivisection
Room:]{.Early-Module-Character-Styles_EM-Heavy-Caps-Run-In
._idGenCharOverride-4} The walls are decorated with [carved images of
disassembled human bodies]{.Dungeon-Emphasis}, all of the victims
swollen with cartoonish obesity. A table with numerous manacles and
clamps lies in the center of the room in a shallow depression, the
five-foot-deep pit ringed by benches for observers.

Along the west wall, a dozen [large glass jars filled with floating
human limbs and organs ]{.Dungeon-Emphasis}stand on a low stone shelf.
One pale, slender arm still wears a gleaming golden bracelet set with
emeralds, the jewelry worth 500 sp. If any jar is opened or spilled the
preservative evaporates into a fetid cloud, forcing any living creature
within 30' to make a Physical save or lose their next round of actions;
on a success, they only lose their Move action. Each jar weighs 3 points
of Encumbrance and can be thrown up to 20 feet. The perfectly
transparent glass of the vessels makes them valuable; a buyer unaware of
their prior use might pay 50 sp apiece for them.

25.[ Storeroom:]{.Early-Module-Character-Styles_EM-Heavy-Caps-Run-In
._idGenCharOverride-4} Neat stacks of yellowed bones are piled in this
room, most so old as to be half-dust. Keeping a careful watch over them
are the [Soft Thrall Walker Jubal-Pon]{.Monster-All-Caps} and his two
[soft thrall beast Centipedes]{.Monster-All-Caps}[.]{.CharOverride-1}

[Jubal-Pon ]{.CharOverride-1}is wrapped around the bones of the Scholar
of Flesh Yakob, and appears as an aristocratic Deepfolk clad in
tight-fitting black clothing and carrying a long, slim knife. His
bestial companions have infested the exoskeletons of dead giant
centipedes, their soft bodies oozing between the chitin plates. Their
mouthparts have no poison, but instead appear as very humanlike teeth.
They whisper "rustle rustle" and "skitter" when Jubal-Pon speaks.

Jubal-Pon, in his identity as the Scholar of Flesh, is deeply incensed
that the other Soft Thralls on this level have so impudently "stolen"
the Deepfolk bones they mantle. He will request that the PCs punish this
crime and bring him the bones of "Meshluq" in room 5 and "Nomlaq" in
room 7.

If the PCs succeed in bringing the Soft Thrall the bones he desires, he
will permit them to chisel open the vault door and take the treasures
within.

[Walker Jubal-Pon]{.Monster-All-Caps-Demi}[ ]{.Monster-All-Caps-Demi}(AC
15, HD 4, HP 20, Atk +4, Dmg 1d8+2, Shock 3/-, Skill +1, Morale 10,
Instinct 3)

[beast Centipedes]{.Monster-All-Caps-Demi}[ ]{.Monster-All-Caps-Demi}(AC
13, HD 2, HP 10, Atk +3, Dmg1d4+2, No Shock, Skill +1, Morale 10,
Instinct 4)

26.[ Vault:]{.Early-Module-Character-Styles_EM-Heavy-Caps-Run-In
._idGenCharOverride-4} The academic treasures of the school were stored
here, behind a metal door that has since corroded into complete
immobility. Chiseling it loose will require serviceable tools and at
least an hour of work.

Within, uncounted ages have reduced most of the metal scrolls stacked
within to lumps of oxidation and bluish rust. [One magically-protected
volume]{.Dungeon-Emphasis} contains arcane secrets of a former age, the
lore sufficient to allow its reader to reconstruct two common 1st level
spells of their choice for their own spellbook. The reader will need to
be able to read Deepfolk script, however.

A small stone coffer marked with the Deepfolk sign for "Emergency
Medical Aid" contains [two potions of healing]{.Dungeon-Emphasis}, each
of which will cure 1d6+1 hit points of damage with no System Strain
cost.

27.[ Chamber of
Solitude:]{.Early-Module-Character-Styles_EM-Heavy-Caps-Run-In
._idGenCharOverride-4} Once a place of private rest as a reward for a
diligent student, a [sleeping platform, table, and bench of
stone]{.Dungeon-Emphasis} are the only furnishings of this room. The
walls are decorated with graven images of a city of massive stone
buildings surrounded by a verdant forest, with [a blue-litten sun
glyph]{.Dungeon-Emphasis} illuminating the room with dim radiance.

A [dish of perfectly preserved black powder]{.Dungeon-Emphasis} rests on
the table. It does nothing if eaten, but if even a pinch of the powder
is inhaled, the user will be filled with a tremendous feeling of
happiness and self-confidence for 1d6+6 turns. While under the influence
of the powder, the user gains a +1 bonus on all social skill checks, 10
temporary hit points that are lost when the powder wears off, and a +2
bonus to hit rolls, damage, and Shock. If the powder is used more than
once per day, the sweating, trembling hangover afterwards will inflict a
-2 penalty to hit rolls, damage, and Shock and a -1 penalty to social
skill checks for 1d6 days afterwards. There are five pinches of powder
in the dish.

One squarish structure engraved on the wall is actually a secret door,
the catch actuated by pushing on one of its windows. Its existence is
obvious from the other side.

28.[ Weeping
Forest:]{.Early-Module-Character-Styles_EM-Heavy-Caps-Run-In
._idGenCharOverride-4} This large chamber has been fashioned to mimic a
surface forest, with a thick layer of sandy earth atop its stone floor,
a fungus-choked pool in the northeast corner, and [seven copper
trees]{.Dungeon-Emphasis} erected at various points. The trees all have
soft, puffy green leaves that bleed a clear lymph if crushed or cut.
Each tree has 20 Encumbrance worth of copper and takes a turn of effort
to hack down with appropriate tools; each unit of copper can be sold for
5 sp.

PCs who enter the room will hear a constant low sobbing interspersed
with slow, agonized breathing. It is the [Soft Thrall
Ikat-Ur]{.Monster-All-Caps}, who was commanded in ancient days to spread
itself and mimic foliage. It once had three companions to help it, but
even Soft Thralls can die, given sufficient time. Now it remains alone,
forced to stretch itself beyond its endurance to plume the forest.

Ikat-Ur is desperate to be freed from its duty, but only the bearer of
the golden mace of office from room 5 can lawfully release it. A
sufficient amount of fire can also kill it, but it is not permitted to
request such mercy. Ikat-Ur is largely unable to think about anything
but its unending torment, but anyone who can release it will be given a
defaced beetle-sigil hidden within its corpus and told of its use.
Displaying this beetle-sigil will cause Soft Thrall Abominations to
become quiescent, doing nothing unless attacked by the bearer's party.
The sigil starts crumbling once removed from Ikat-Ur's soft body and
will fall to dust in 48 hours.

A drape of Ikat-Ur's vines conceals a doorway on the north wall. The
vines can be easily brushed aside, and there are signs that the door has
been used recently. Father Marceau's believers use it to get to the
prison cells in 29 where they keep their future sacrifices.

29.[ Prison:]{.Early-Module-Character-Styles_EM-Heavy-Caps-Run-In
._idGenCharOverride-4} Six [iron-barred cells line the
corridor]{.Dungeon-Emphasis}, each one locked by long-lost keys. Within
each cell is a low stone bench and a small hole in the floor for waste.
There are relatively fresh pine boughs in cells E, F, and G, but there
are no living prisoners here at the moment.

In the latrine of cell A, one of the companions of Milon de Lomagne
managed to hide his journal before being dragged to his doom on the
level below. Time and damp have ruined almost all of it, but a fragment
of the last page is still legible, words scrawled in dried blood.

"\...has gone mad. He says this heathen idol will grant him all of
Montfroid for a fief, and that he need not fear God's anger for he will
never die. Terese and Jacque are no more, so he means to seal his
bargain with my blood. I hear him coming. May God receive me and may he
damn Milon de Lomagne!"

30.[ Stair Below:]{.Early-Module-Character-Styles_EM-Heavy-Caps-Run-In
._idGenCharOverride-4} A line of glowing blue sun-glyphs runs from
beneath the rockfall in this room to the spiral stairway that winds down
50' to area 12 on level 4. The statues in the corners are like those in
room 1, depicting Deepfolk warriors bearing tools of harvest and
construction. If the hammer of the northeastern one is twisted, the
secret door on the north wall will pop open. Its latch is obvious from
the other side of the wall.

Third Level Wandering Encounters

The cultists from level 4 occasionally come up to this level, as they
need to keep their sacrifices away from the toxic miasma below. Aside
from those fanatics, the worst wandering peril on the level is the
Abomination that cleanses the salle of intruders.
:::

::: _idGenObjectLayout-1
::: {#Diocesi_de_Montfroid_PDF.xhtml#_idContainer110}
![](image/MilonsEnd-Floor3_30x26.jpg){._idGenObjectAttribute-1
role="presentation"}
:::
:::

::: {#Diocesi_de_Montfroid_PDF.xhtml#_idContainer111 .Basic-Text-Frame}
[1 Square = 10']{.Futura-PT-Demi}
:::

::: {#Diocesi_de_Montfroid_PDF.xhtml#_idContainer112 .Basic-Text-Frame}
       Room
  ---- ------------------------
  1    Ascent of the Chosen
  2    The Straight Path
  3    Assembly Room
  4    Armory
  5    Lieutenant's Quarters
  6    Master's Office
  7    Master's Bedchamber
  8    Barracks
  9    Shrine to the Blue Sun
  10   Vestry
  11   Storeroom
  12   Thrall's Stair
  13   Priest's Quarters
  14   Private Shrine
  15   Dining Hall
  16   Walk of Honor
  17   Changing Room
  18   Sauna
  19   Baths
  20   Classroom
  21   Library
  22   Sage's Quarters
  23   Training Ground
  24   Vivisection Room
  25   Storeroom
  26   Vault
  27   Chamber of Solitude
  28   Weeping Forest
  29   Prison
  30   Stair Below
:::

::: {#Diocesi_de_Montfroid_PDF.xhtml#_idContainer113 .Basic-Text-Frame}
  d8   Wandering Encounters on This Level
  ---- -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  1    The [Soft Thrall Abomination Eight-Five-Vomal]{.Monster-All-Caps} (AC 15, HD 5, HP 30, Atk +6 x2, Dmg 1d8+2, Shock 4/-, Skill +1, Morale 12, Instinct 5) stalks the halls, and will be audible the round before it arrives. It moves at a steady pace of 20' per move, or 40' if attacked at range. It paces the corridors and rooms endlessly, seeking intruders to kill. PCs can flee ahead of it and it will not actively pursue, but it will attack if any human comes within its reach. It will not be encountered inside any room except for 10, 11 and 13.
  2    A weak plea for help is heard around the corner, where a village girl lies clutching her eviscerated belly. The girl can do nothing but repeat her pleas, as it is actually a Soft Thrall that mantled the bones of an abandoned cult sacrifice. It has been re-enacting her last moments for years now and cannot think to do anything else.
  3    A patch of flesh-seeking fungus clings to the ceiling ahead of the PCs. Unless they take special precautions or have encountered it before, the lead PC must make an Evasion save or have it drop on them, inflicting 2d6 acid damage and ruining their armor or clothing before they can scrape it off.
  4    [A choral bellow of many-throated anguish echoes through the salle. It's the only sound that Eight-Five-Vomal can make.]{.CharOverride-1}
  5    1d4+4 [gobelin warriors]{.Monster-All-Caps}[ (AC 12, HD 1, Atk +1, Dmg 1d6 spear, Shock 2/13, Skill +0, Morale 9, Instinct 3)]{.CharOverride-1} are venturing below to look for loot.
  6    1d6+4 [Blue Sun Cultists]{.Monster-All-Caps}[ (AC 12, HD 1, Atk +1, Dmg 1d6 spear, Shock 2/13, Skill +0, Morale 10, Instinct 4)]{.CharOverride-1} have come up from level 4, on their way to seek sacrifices above.
  7    Noxious, spore-laden fumes billow from half-clogged ventilation holes, inflicting 1 System Strain on the party.
  8    1d8+2 [Pagan Raiders ]{.Monster-All-Caps}[(AC 12, HD 1, Atk +1, Dmg 1d6 spear, Shock 2/13, Skill +0, Morale 9, Instinct 3)]{.CharOverride-1} are on an errand to fetch food for the cultists, a task they sullenly resent.
:::

::: {#Diocesi_de_Montfroid_PDF.xhtml#_idContainer114 .Two-Column-Text}
[]{#Diocesi_de_Montfroid_PDF.xhtml#_idTextAnchor014}Level 4: The Blue
Glass Depths

Unlike the rest of the Deep, the structures and rock walls of this level
are composed of a translucent blue glass, tough as granite. The glowing
face of the idol in room 23 casts an azure radiance that penetrates the
very rock of this place, passing through walls to light the entire level
with a flickering, torch-bright blue illumination.

[This light is toxic to surface humans.]{.Dungeon-Emphasis} Unless a
surfacer has been consecrated to the Blue Sun's service by the font in
area 19, each hour of exposure will add 1 System Strain to the victim.
When it exceeds their maximum they will fall unconscious, dying in
another hour if not pulled from the light. A victim will not notice the
System Strain increase until they gain System Strain from some other
source. Ordinary clothing or veils cannot ward off the effect of the
light.

1.[ Salle Stair:]{.Early-Module-Character-Styles_EM-Heavy-Caps-Run-In
._idGenCharOverride-4} The spiral stair here winds upward to room 12 on
level 3. This is the lair of [the Charwoman]{.Monster-All-Caps}, an
acidic variation of a typical Soft Thrall Abomination. Her upper torso
is that of a beautiful, red-eyed Deepfolk woman, but her lower half is a
ten-foot-wide cone of gelatinous acid that can extend pseudopods to
strike at foes up to 30' distant. She moves at only 20' per action, but
will always prefer to move atop prone or downed foes, automatically
inflicting 1d10 acid damage to them and killing Mortally Wounded
victims. Being largely liquid she cannot be grappled, and she is immune
to non-magical weapons. She can neutralize her acid when it's necessary
for her pseudopods to manipulate objects.

The Charwoman's only interest is in keeping the Deep clean; killing
intruders is the duty of others, though she will attack if assaulted,
hungry, or someone is making a mess in her presence. She has recently
fed on the victim in room 2 and is currently unlikely to attack
outright. She is aware of the cultists and Milon de Lomagne, but
registers them only as surfacers who came down and have not left yet.
She learned Court Riu from Milon, and enjoys singing Riu folk songs as
she cleans; she would like to learn more of them.

[the Charwoman]{.Monster-All-Caps-Demi}[ ]{.Monster-All-Caps-Demi}(AC
15, HD 5, HP 30, Atk +6 x3, Dmg 1d6+4 acid, Shock 4/-, Skill +1, Morale
10, Instinct 5)

2.[ Temple Stair:]{.Early-Module-Character-Styles_EM-Heavy-Caps-Run-In
._idGenCharOverride-4} The stairway on the north wall wends upward to
room 19 on level 2. The south door hangs open, and a [pagan raider lies
face-down on the floor]{.Dungeon-Emphasis}, arms stretched out toward
the stairway. The lower half of his body has been digested by something,
viscera giving way to a liquid smear of pelvis and legs.

3.[ Ascent Stair:]{.Early-Module-Character-Styles_EM-Heavy-Caps-Run-In
._idGenCharOverride-4} The northern stairway climbs all the way to room
3 on level 1. [Four mangled corpses]{.Dungeon-Emphasis} have been
propped along the west wall, each hung up on a crude rack of cut
branches as a warning to intruders. The remains are blistered with
chemical burns and black with decay.

4.[ Feeding
Troughs:]{.Early-Module-Character-Styles_EM-Heavy-Caps-Run-In
._idGenCharOverride-4} Glass benches line the north wall before [a low
glass trough]{.Dungeon-Emphasis} that runs the length of the room, its
bottom still crusted with mummified thrall-slop.

5.[ Thrall
Barracks:]{.Early-Module-Character-Styles_EM-Heavy-Caps-Run-In
._idGenCharOverride-4} A [dozen glass sleeping-shelves
]{.Dungeon-Emphasis}line the north wall, one atop the other. The south
wall has bone-racks instead for hanging a Soft Thrall's armature and
broken clay pots to house the thrall's gelatinous body. Someone hid a
treasure in the bottom of a jar; a fist-sized statuette of a beautiful
female knight in elaborate and impractical armor, fashioned of some
unbreakable white stone. Casual buyers might give 50 sp for the novelty
of it, but scholars and art buyers would recognize it as a Seven Rivers
Confederacy work worth at least 2,000 sp to a wealthy collector.

6.[ Slavemaster's
Quarters:]{.Early-Module-Character-Styles_EM-Heavy-Caps-Run-In
._idGenCharOverride-4} The floor is littered with [smashed funguswood
furnishings]{.Dungeon-Emphasis}. A large armoire remains mostly intact,
and hangs open on the northern wall. Its rear wall swings inward when a
catch on the side of the armoire is pressed, giving access to the
service tunnel to area 23.

7.[ Vault:]{.Early-Module-Character-Styles_EM-Heavy-Caps-Run-In
._idGenCharOverride-4} This treasure-chamber is piled high with the
remains of those things the Deepfolk counted most precious. Glass
shelves are laden with cones of ancient aromatics, stacks of
fine-grained lumber, withered remnants of luxuriant furs, and dessicated
heaps of herbs. These goods are worthless in Montfroid, but[ several of
the boxes they are kept in are of silver-inlaid
bronze]{.Dungeon-Emphasis}, though the silver is heavily tarnished.
There are ten boxes, each one counting as five items of encumbrance and
worth 250 silver pieces. In the bottom of the eighth, under a pile of
ancient mustard seeds, is a small brass flask containing one dose of an
[elixir of noon]{.Bold ._idGenCharOverride-5}. When drunk, the user will
shine with purest daylight for 1d4 hours, illuminating up to 120' around
them and gaining a +2 bonus to AC due to the difficulty of looking
directly at them. The light they emit counts as daylight for magical
purposes.

8.[ Tool Storage:]{.Early-Module-Character-Styles_EM-Heavy-Caps-Run-In
._idGenCharOverride-4} Assorted ancient brooms, buckets, fungus-fringe
dusters, whips, pincers, and mats lie in mouldering heaps on the floor
and on shelves of blue glass.

[The western door is of thick bronze]{.Dungeon-Emphasis} with a large
brazen beetle spread over the upper half in high relief. It is locked
securely with a difficulty 10 lock. If door is unlocked and the handle
is gripped, a mechanism behind the beetle-relief will flip it downward
with crushing force to smash anyone standing directly before the door
for 3d6 damage. The unlocked door can be safely pulled open by grasping
the beetle relief.

Detecting the trap is difficulty 10, but players who specifically
examine the handle will see that it's designed to pivot inward slightly
when grasped.

9.[ Thrall Frame
Storage:]{.Early-Module-Character-Styles_EM-Heavy-Caps-Run-In
._idGenCharOverride-4} A [dozen articulated skeletons are racked against
the wall]{.Dungeon-Emphasis} here, their bones bound together with
intricate sockets and wires. The bones themselves are decayed, crumbling
at a touch.

The [eastern door is of dull metal and tightly sealed
]{.Dungeon-Emphasis}with a rubbery black gasket and a difficulty 10
lock.

10.[ Punishment
Cell:]{.Early-Module-Character-Styles_EM-Heavy-Caps-Run-In
._idGenCharOverride-4} Four Soft Thralls were left in this cell when the
Deep was abandoned, growing mad in their suffering since. The jars and
engines and wards meant to punish them have been ground to powder in the
millenia since, and the four have amalgamated into a deranged [Viscid
Mass]{.Monster-All-Caps}, a roiling mound of flesh roughly ten feet in
diameter that flows like a liquid at 40' per round. It is completely
insane and can think only to smash anything within reach.

The creature will immediately press up against the door if the PCs try
to open it. Quick-witted PCs might be able to slam it shut on the mass;
this is automatic if they specifically prepared for the need, or a
Str/Exert check at difficulty 9 if caught by surprise. Once free, it
will try to murder everything around it. It will not pursue fleeing PCs,
being more occupied in smashing its surroundings.

[Viscid Mass ]{.Monster-All-Caps-Demi}(AC 10, HD 10, HP 50, Atk +8 x4,
Dmg 1d6+2, Shock 4/-, Skill +1, Morale 12, Instinct 8)

11.[ Collapsed
Descent:]{.Early-Module-Character-Styles_EM-Heavy-Caps-Run-In
._idGenCharOverride-4} Huge boulders block a gently-descending ramp that
once led down to the great lift-bore that connected the Deep with the
underground city of Radix. Several other Deeps once led to the bore, but
this path is blocked by a mile of fallen stone.

12.[ Path of the
Elect:]{.Early-Module-Character-Styles_EM-Heavy-Caps-Run-In
._idGenCharOverride-4} The dim glow of the [sun sigils on the
floor]{.Dungeon-Emphasis} is lost in the blue light. The stairs wind
upward to room 30 on level 3. The walls surrounding the stair are
engraved with [massive Deepfolk warrior reliefs]{.Dungeon-Emphasis}.

13.[ Processional
Vestry:]{.Early-Module-Character-Styles_EM-Heavy-Caps-Run-In
._idGenCharOverride-4} Along the walls, [racks of ornate beetle-shell
armor ]{.Dungeon-Emphasis}hang in opalescent rows. The chitin is so old
that it falls to dust at a touch. Beneath the racks, a dull bronze
coffer holds rusted ceremonial blades and one blue glass [stiletto
+1]{.Bold ._idGenCharOverride-5}.

14.[ Guardian's
Lair:]{.Early-Module-Character-Styles_EM-Heavy-Caps-Run-In
._idGenCharOverride-4} An archway marks the entrance to this cavern, the
lair of the [Soft Thrall Abomination
Four-Nineteen-HOKMAL]{.Monster-All-Caps}. The creature has a 2 in 6
chance of being present here at any given time.

Hokmal exists only to kill surfacer intruders; it can smell the ritual
consecration granted in area 19, and will not harm devotees or those
with them. Its energies are almost spent after long centuries, and it
moves only 20' per action. It can move at 40' after each round in which
it has been attacked.

The blue glass cavern is empty save for [a mound of decaying skulls
piled in the back]{.Dungeon-Emphasis}, the oldest dating back centuries.
Hokmal stacks them here as proof of its diligence in pleasing its
long-dead masters.

[Four-Nineteen-HOKMAL]{.Monster-All-Caps-Demi}[
]{.Monster-All-Caps-Demi}(AC 15, HD 6, HP 50, Atk +7 x2, Dmg 1d10+4,
Shock 5/-, Skill +1, Morale 12, Instinct 5)

15.[ Guard Post:]{.Early-Module-Character-Styles_EM-Heavy-Caps-Run-In
._idGenCharOverride-4} Two low sleeping platforms of blue glass rest
against the far side of the room, with [a small, cold
hearth]{.Dungeon-Emphasis} cut into the southern wall. The hearth's
ashes are fresh from relatively recent use by cultists. A half-burnt
holy symbol of the Bleeding God lies amid the char, a small thorned rod
on a scorched leather necklace.

16.[ Deadfall:]{.Early-Module-Character-Styles_EM-Heavy-Caps-Run-In
._idGenCharOverride-4} A [length of stained rope]{.Dungeon-Emphasis} is
stretched across the passage here at ankle height, the far end tied to a
wedge that supports a weighted mushroom trunk perched on the northwest
side of the gap. The trap is meant for the crawler in area 18, and is
blatantly obvious to adventurers moving with usual caution. If the rope
is pulled, the trunk will fall and inflict 4d6 damage on anyone in the
gap. The rope has also been smeared with a contact poison that forces a
Physical save on skin contact or 2d6 damage and 2 System Strain are
incurred. The poison will be rubbed off after three uses or after
twenty-four hours.

17.[ Glass Mushroom
Forest:]{.Early-Module-Character-Styles_EM-Heavy-Caps-Run-In
._idGenCharOverride-4} A [thicket of tall black
mushrooms]{.Dungeon-Emphasis} rises from the cavern floor, their flesh
somehow both crystalline and fibrous. The mushrooms are roughly twelve
feet tall, with caps spreading out half as wide and trunks as thick
around as a man's chest. They are too tough to be cut by anything short
of an axe, but each mushroom is so light it can be carried by two men.
Their fungal flesh does not rot or burn.

The forest is heavily trafficked, and each time the PCs pass through it
they have a 3 in 6 chance of meeting a wandering encounter.

18.[ Crawler Den:]{.Early-Module-Character-Styles_EM-Heavy-Caps-Run-In
._idGenCharOverride-4} A transparent [Glass Crawler]{.Monster-All-Caps}
lairs here. The creature resembles a spider-legged centipede the size of
a pony, and can skitter up walls at 40' per move. It is completely
transparent, and easily blends in with the glass walls of the cave. It
prefers to stalk its prey, attacking only lone victims or weakened
groups; it is currently hiding on the ceiling 30' above, but will skulk
after intruders for 2d6 turns after they leave.

The only sign of its presence is the [mound of human bones on the south
side of the cave]{.Dungeon-Emphasis}, the rags of pagan leathers and
Montfroider peasant blouses tangled amid the remains. Searching through
the pile would take at least a turn and give only 15 sp worth of coins
and trinkets for the trouble.

[Glass Crawler]{.Monster-All-Caps-Demi}[ ]{.Monster-All-Caps-Demi}(AC
18, HD 5, HP 28, Atk +7, Dmg 1d6+Physical save or paralyzed for 1d4+1
rounds, Shock N/A, Skill +3, Morale 8, Instinct 4)

19.[ Font of
Consecration:]{.Early-Module-Character-Styles_EM-Heavy-Caps-Run-In
._idGenCharOverride-4} A [glimmering blue stone font]{.Dungeon-Emphasis}
spills a faintly acrid-smelling water into a basin carved with the
sigils of the Blue Sun. The overflow from the basin spills out into two
large, waist-deep pools on either side of the font. The water tastes
metallic, but is not especially harmful.

Those wholly drenched by the waters of the font are consecrated to the
service of the Blue Sun for the following six months. During this time
they are immune to the harmful effects of the Blue Sun's radiance,
including the glow of Father Marceau, and the guardian abomination in
room 14 will leave them and their companions unharmed. Normal sunlight
becomes slightly toxic to them, however, and they will not be able to
recover System Strain after a night's rest unless they spent the entire
prior day hidden from sunlight.

20.[ Cultist Camp:]{.Early-Module-Character-Styles_EM-Heavy-Caps-Run-In
._idGenCharOverride-4} Two [separate crowds of cultists crouch around
two small charcoal campfires]{.Dungeon-Emphasis}, eyeing each other
uneasily. The northern group consists of ten veteran [Peasant
Cultists]{.Monster-All-Caps} led by wiry old Sister Blanche, who instead
has 15 HP and +4 to hit. The southern is of nine [Pagan
Raiders]{.Monster-All-Caps} with the same combat statistics, following
Notker the Impaler, who has 4 HD, 20 HP and +5 to hit with his spear.
Both groups are "casually" arranged in semicircles around their fires,
the flames licking skewers of roasted manflesh.

The pagans are a new addition to Father Marceau's flock, having thrown
themselves on his mercy after a failed attempt to rob Milon de Lomagne
in area 23. Marceau gave them rich gifts of Deep-plunder to reward their
conversion, but the ancient hatred between pagan and Montfroider remains
hot.

Because of this, neither group is eager to spring up and attack
intruders, for fear the others might take advantage of any losses.
Instead, both will courteously invite strangers to their fire for food
and low conversation.

Neither peasants nor raiders will make any bones about their true
nature, nor will they be reluctant to speak of the splendor of the Blue
Sun and the promise of riches and strength for those who follow her.
Both Notker and Blanche are more interested in secretly persuading the
PCs to attack the other group, promising to aid them. Notker will offer
half the pagan's loot in payment, while Blanche promises them a house in
Lebret that she recently inherited. These promises are sincere as far as
they go, for both groups expect the PCs to become their brethren in the
faith sooner or later.

If the PCs attack a group, the others will indeed move to assist them.
Father Marceau will rush out 1d4 rounds after the fight begins, however,
and his presence will cow the cultists into uniting to murder the
infidel intruders. If the PCs parley and decline to fight, Father
Marceau will be called out to negotiate with them. Marceau cannot afford
to let the PCs go now that they know the identities of the peasant
cultists, so the party must either join his purposes or convince him
that it would be more trouble to kill them than to let them go.

The peasants have left all their wealth at home, but the raiders have
stolen or been given 1,000 sp worth of silver plate and jewelry, 5 gems
worth 100 sp each, and a flask containing a magical [sovereign
remedy]{.Bold ._idGenCharOverride-5} that will cure any non-congenital
disease. The remedy will go bad in three months, becoming an ingested
poison that forces a Physical save to avoid 4d10 damage.

[Cultists and Raiders]{.Monster-All-Caps-Demi}[
]{.Monster-All-Caps-Demi}(AC 13, HD 2, HP 10, Atk +3, Dmg 1d6+2, Shock
2/13, Skill +1, Morale 11, Instinct 3)

21.[ Father Marceau's
Quarters:]{.Early-Module-Character-Styles_EM-Heavy-Caps-Run-In
._idGenCharOverride-4} The sinister heresiarch [Father
Marceau]{.Monster-All-Caps} dwells in this shabby room when not occupied
with preaching to his flock or leading them to and from the village of
Lebret. He is a thin, ascetical man with a scarred cheek and a sonorous
voice, clad in stained leathers and with a short spear close at hand.

If pressed, Father Marceau will erupt in a brilliant blue light, a
blessing of his goddess. While glowing, he heals 8 HP each round and
every unconsecrated surfacer within 40' gains 1d2 System Strain each
round from the toxic blue radiance. Those pushed beyond their maximum
fall unconscious, and will die with any further gain. The light will
last until Marceau is dead or pacified. The pure daylight of the [elixir
of noon]{.Bold ._idGenCharOverride-5} from room 7 will nullify this
light's power and prevent Marceau's healing.

Marceau wants more followers, and particularly wants to secure the Deep
as a cult stronghold. If the PCs are not implacable hostile, he'll offer
to tell them the secret of killing Milon de Lomagne and taking the blade
Blancaflor; if they can show proof of their conquest to Baron Sicard in
Nouvila, he will surely enfeoff them with Milon's End. If the new lords
them turn a blind eye to Marceau's friends, the heretic can ensure that
the pagans do not trouble the new lords. Marceau is sincere in his
offer, confident that he can later turn the PCs to worship of the Blue
Sun once its benefits are made obvious.

If the PCs cooperate with Marceau, he will tell them about the
flesh-rope that holds Milon de Lomagne's life, explain the secret of
cutting it, and advise them to draw the warrior away from his throne
before an ally chops up the tether near its source.

[Father Marceau]{.Monster-All-Caps-Demi}[ ]{.Monster-All-Caps-Demi}(AC
13, HD 5, HP 32, Atk +6, Dmg 1d6+2, Shock 2/13, Skill +2, Morale 10,
Instinct 2)

22.[ Blasphemous
Shrine:]{.Early-Module-Character-Styles_EM-Heavy-Caps-Run-In
._idGenCharOverride-4} The [man-tall idol of the Blue Sun
goddess]{.Dungeon-Emphasis} against the northern wall is surrounded by
dozens of broken symbols of the Bleeding God, the thorned rods of the
faith smashed by generations of cultists. The floor before the idol is
crusted brown with old bloodstains, marks that match the smears that
decorate the idol's stone mouth.

If a surface human is sacrificed before the idol and their blood offered
to the idol's mouth, the victim's blood becomes consecrated. A flask of
it may be gathered as a [sovereign remedy]{.Bold ._idGenCharOverride-5}
as described in area 20, the gore turning thin and bluish in color as it
cools. The celebrant of the rite is cured of all diseases, even
congenital illnesses, and their maximum hit points rise to a minimum of
5 HP per level or hit die.

The celebrant also becomes an obligate cannibal. They must consume at
least a pound of relatively fresh human flesh per month or they can no
longer lose System Strain through any means and suffer a -1 penalty to
all skill checks and hit rolls due to the distractions of hunger. This
curse can only be lifted by a mighty penance administered by the
Eveque-Abat himself, something stern enough to constitute an adventure
in its own right.

23.[ Throne of the
Chosen:]{.Early-Module-Character-Styles_EM-Heavy-Caps-Run-In
._idGenCharOverride-4} Within this high-vaulted cavern [a massive idol
of the Blue Sun goddess]{.Dungeon-Emphasis} stands 40' tall atop a
raised platform that stands 20' above the cavern floor. Its face shines
brilliantly with blue radiance. Four glowing blue braziers stand at the
edge of the platform, and a massive throne of blue glass sits at the
feet of the idol.

Idol, platform, and throne are covered in [a fibrous organic mass of
sinewy wet flesh]{.Dungeon-Emphasis}, giving the blue glass a cancerous
look. The flesh pulses and quivers, small pseudopods snatching up
beetles and other cave vermin before pulling them into the mass to be
digested.

Upon the throne sits the pale form of [Milon de
Lomagne]{.Monster-All-Caps} with a lace of rusted mail for a shroud and
the magical blade Blancaflor resting atop his knees.

In combat, Milon will remain connected to the statue by an arm-thick
rope of flesh that has grown into the base of his spine. So long as he
remains connected to the mass, any wounds he takes heal instantly.
Cutting the umbilical requires hitting AC 13 and doing 10 points of
damage in total. Spells, flame, and other energies cannot harm the cord;
only a magical edged weapon can cut it or a blade blessed by a capelan
of the True Faith.

Once the rope is severed, Milon begins to wither and die, perishing in
1d2+2 more rounds. He can re-connect it if given an undisturbed round to
let it heal back. The tether allows him to roam up to 150 feet from the
throne.

Milon has been seated here for eighty years, "blessed" with immortality
by his new goddess, but unable to leave her presence until he is
lawfully sent forth to conquer Montfroid. As the only Deepfolk capable
of giving such a command died thousands of years ago, he has been
trapped here in the cavern ever since, with only the cultists for
company. He bitterly regrets his apostasy, but he is also terrified of
the hellfire awaiting his death.

The flesh-rope that feeds him can punish him if he refuses to smite
intruders, and he fears an unblessed death, so he will fight any
surfacer who approaches him. If an orthodox cleric of the True Faith is
present, however, he will beg to confess his sins and be executed in a
state of grace. His full confession will require at least two turns to
enumerate all the intruders he has slain, the friends he sacrificed to
the Blue Sun, and the countless vile urges he has indulged in the
decades he has spent here. The flesh-tendril will try to force him to
attack the PCs by poisoning him with blistering toxins, but Milon is too
desperate to be swayed by it. At the confession's end, he will give his
blade to a PC and bid them cut the tether.

The magical sword [Blancaflor]{.Dungeon-Emphasis} is a [long sword
+2]{.Bold ._idGenCharOverride-5} fashioned of mirror-bright silver
metal, the pommel wrought like a flower in the Seven Rivers Confederacy
style. The blade is indestructible by mundane forces, and the bearer has
a +1 Reaction Roll bonus when dealing with Courontines.

Unbeknownst to Milon, the sword was consecrated to sacrificial vengeance
by an ancient poet-king. Once per month, when the bearer swears to kill
a particular foe or die in the attempt, the blade is fired with a
terrible resolve. Its attacks against that foe automatically hit and
inflict triple damage. If the wielder's blow actually reduces the target
to zero hit points, both the target and the wielder invariably and
unavoidably perish, regardless of the spells or wards about them. This
bane persists as long as the target lives, and the bane's target cannot
be changed until the wielder or the target dies. A wielder has an
intuitive sense of this power's effects and cost when it is active.

[Milon de Lomagne]{.Monster-All-Caps-Demi}[
]{.Monster-All-Caps-Demi}[(AC 12, HD 6, HP 50, Atk +9 x2, Dmg 1d10+6,
Shock 6/-, Skill +2, Morale 12, Instinct 3)]{.CharOverride-1}

After the Deep is Delved

If the PCs succeed in acquiring the sword Blancaflor, whether by fair
means or foul, Baron Sicard of Nouvila will be highly impressed. He will
invite the party to a feast in their honor, and offer to enfeoff such
worthy warriors as the videms of Milon's End if they agree to secure the
keep once more, allowing them the right to admit or deny others access
to the Deep and social access to the rulers of Montfroid. If the PCs
agree to discharge the duty faithfully, he will give them 1,000 sp as a
gift to help the rebuilding, which may be a task easier promised than
done.

Father Marceau and his cultists know of the secret stream entrance to
the Deep on level 1's room 4 and will use it if they must to get access
to their precious idol. Marceau would much rather suborn the new lords
of Milon's End, however, offering the assistance of his cult in
rebuilding the place and securing it from the perils of the wild. He
will not reveal the more bloodthirsty aspects of his faith until after
the PCs are firmly entangled with his heresy and unable to conveniently
distance themselves.

Fourth Level Wandering Encounters

All of the creatures listed here are immune to the Blue Sun's miasmic
light. Some of the encounters below can also be found in specific
locations on this level, and count as no result if already dead. The
packs of human raiders and cultists will cease to be encountered if the
main groups in room 20 are eliminated.
:::

::: _idGenObjectLayout-1
::: {#Diocesi_de_Montfroid_PDF.xhtml#_idContainer115}
![](image/MilonsEnd-Floor4_38x32.png){._idGenObjectAttribute-1
role="presentation"}
:::
:::

::: {#Diocesi_de_Montfroid_PDF.xhtml#_idContainer116 .Basic-Text-Frame}
[1 Square = 10']{.Futura-PT-Demi}
:::

::: {#Diocesi_de_Montfroid_PDF.xhtml#_idContainer117 .Basic-Text-Frame}
  d8   Wandering Encounters on This Level
  ---- --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  1    The [Soft Thrall Abomination Four-Nineteen-HOKMAL ]{.Monster-All-Caps}(AC 15, HD 6, HP 50, Atk +7 x2, Dmg 1d10+4, Shock 5/-, Skill +1, Morale 12, Instinct 5) from area 14 approaches. It moves very quietly, requiring a Wis/Notice check by the sharpest PC at difficulty 10 to hear it the round before it arrives. Hokmal won't finish off downed or playing-dead PCs, leaving them for the Charwoman.
  2    The PCs are approached by [the Charwoman]{.Monster-All-Caps} (AC 15, HD 5, HP 30, Atk +6 x3, Dmg 1d6+4 acid, Shock 4/-, Skill +1, Morale 10, Instinct 5) from room 1. Her degree of present hunger is determined by her Reaction Roll; her willingness to attack is based on that and how well the PCs satisfy her longing for new songs.
  3    The sinister [Glass Crawler]{.Monster-All-Caps} (AC 18, HD 5, HP 28, Atk +7, Dmg 1d6+Physical save or paralyzed for 1d4+1 rounds, Shock N/A, Skill +3, Morale 8, Instinct 4) from room 18 is stalking the party. It takes a Wis/Notice check by the keenest PC at difficulty 10 to spot it on the ceiling. It will follow them for 2d6 turns, attacking if they seem weak or distracted. It can be satisfied by an offered corpse or other foodstuffs.
  4    [2d6+3 ]{.CharOverride-1}[Peasant Cultists]{.Monster-All-Caps} (AC 13, HD 2, HP 10, Atk +3, Dmg 1d6+2, Shock 2/13, Skill +1, Morale 11, Instinct 3) are patrolling the caves in search of the Glass Crawler. Intruders are required to convert or have their lips sealed permanently.
  5    1d10+2 [Pagan Raiders]{.Monster-All-Caps} (AC 13, HD 2, HP 10, Atk +3, Dmg 1d6+2, Shock 2/13, Skill +1, Morale 11, Instinct 3) are coming back with stolen charcoal to feed the campfires in area 20. They're inclined to make a deal with PCs to kill the Montfroider cultists as explained in that area.
  6    The faint, melancholy sound of singing echoes through the cavern. Milon de Lomagne has forgotten most of the words.
  7    One of the Crawler's half-eaten cultist kills is around the corner, the corpse still propped up on hands and knees in paralyzed rigor.
  8    A waft of black fungal spores is gusted on a ventilation breeze. All PCs must make a Physical save or end up coughing and wheezing for 1d6 turns, gaining 1 System Strain and making stealth impossible during that time.
:::

::: {#Diocesi_de_Montfroid_PDF.xhtml#_idContainer118 .Two-Column-Text}
[]{#Diocesi_de_Montfroid_PDF.xhtml#_idTextAnchor015}The Soft Thralls

The Deepfolk of Radix were a people born to a merciless world of hunger,
toil, and privation. So great were the labors necessary to keep the
undercity from destruction that no life could be wasted lightly, however
great their offenses.

Rather than be executed, the disfavored of the city were made thralls,
condemned to live on the barest minimum of resources and to hide their
disgraceful persons from the public eye. Yet some offended even more
gravely, committing such crimes as could not be forgiven by only one
life of toil.

These wretches were handed over to the sorcerer-scientists of Radix, who
extracted their bones, revised their tissues, and scraped their brains
free of all but a few anguished shreds of identity. The twitching,
viscid puddle of flesh that remained was a Soft Thrall.

Qualities of a Soft Thrall

Soft Thralls are functionally immortal and are impervious to anything
that does not completely destroy their tissues. Without an armature to
hang themselves upon they can crawl at only 5' per move, and their wet
pseudopods can manipulate no more than a few pounds of weight. They can
pass through any hole big enough to admit a mouse. They require neither
food, water, nor air, being fueled by their curse.

Types of Soft Thralls

Soft Thralls are found in three general types, depending on the kind of
skeleton or armature they inhabit.

[Soft Thrall Walkers]{.Monster-All-Caps} are made when a Soft Thrall
enfolds the bones of a dead humanoid. Over the course of some hours, the
creature shapes itself to appear as the remains did in life, copying
more or less of the entity's personality from the spiritual traces left
on their bones. This copying is always imperfect, and the Soft Thrall
will usually end up as a parody of its host obsessed with mimicking it
and its duties.

If a Walker is reduced to zero hit points, it will melt away from the
bones into a weeping puddle, a mouth forming to beg mercy as it creeps
away. It may return to the bones later if they are intact enough to be
usable.

[Soft Thrall Beasts]{.Monster-All-Caps} are created when a Soft Thrall
cannot find a human skeleton to hoist its tissues, and is forced to
inhabit the bones or exoskeletons of animals. Such beasts retain a human
degree of intellect, but clumsily mimic the natural behavior of their
host, and often mix in human anatomy with their imitation of the living
creature. Like Walkers, a "slain" Beast will leave the Soft Thrall a
cringing puddle around its bones, wailing as it seeks to hide.

[Soft Thrall Abominations]{.Monster-All-Caps} are the product of special
sorcerous malice, as several unlucky victims are forcibly stitched
together and draped over a war-armature of black metal and wet bone.
They pulse with a half-dozen weeping eyes, sobbing mouths, and twitching
flesh-cilia. All of them are firmly imprinted with a duty by their
creator, and while they will carry the task out with human intellect,
they are largely incapable of communicating or thinking of anything but
their duty. If reduced to zero hit points, the torn fragments of the
Abomination will simply bubble and scream, waiting for a sorcerer's
attentions that are unlikely to ever come.

In all cases, individual Soft Thralls can vary in power and danger. The
bones they mantle can significantly affect their abilities, and some of
them were "improved" by their creators in various terrible and painful
ways.

Dealing with Soft Thralls

Soft Thrall Walkers tend to think like actors bent on carrying out a
role without actually understanding what it is they are doing. It will
want to serve the function of the humanoid it mimics, and will attack
any who interfere with that. Those who cooperate with its purpose can
gain its cooperation.

Soft Thrall Beasts are much like Walkers in their mentality, but they're
trying to act like whatever animal they appear to be. They're never very
good at it. They can understand human speech, but will only make such
sounds as they think the animal ought to be making.

Abominations usually refuse all parley. They were created to perform
acts of violence or vigilance, and their creators commonly took care to
scrape away any troublesome free will or independent judgment. They are
strictly bound to the rules of their function, however, and will not
violate them even if it results in their destruction.
:::

::: {#Diocesi_de_Montfroid_PDF.xhtml#_idContainer119 .Basic-Text-Frame}
  [Soft Thrall Type]{.CharOverride-4}   [HD]{.CharOverride-4}   [AC]{.CharOverride-4}   [Atk]{.CharOverride-4}   [Dmg]{.CharOverride-4}   [Shock]{.CharOverride-4}   [ML]{.CharOverride-4}   [Move]{.CharOverride-4}   [Skill]{.CharOverride-4}   [Save]{.CharOverride-4}   [Instinct]{.CharOverride-4}
  ------------------------------------- ----------------------- ----------------------- ------------------------ ------------------------ -------------------------- ----------------------- ------------------------- -------------------------- ------------------------- -----------------------------
  [Walker]{.CharOverride-4}             2                       15                      +3                       By Wpn                   By Wpn                     10                      30'                       +1                         14+                       3
  [Beast]{.CharOverride-4}              3                       15                      +4                       1d6+2                    2/-                        9                       40'                       +1                         14+                       5
  [Abomination]{.CharOverride-4}        6                       15                      +7x2                     1d10+4                   5/-                        12                      30'                       +1                         12+                       5
:::

::: {#Diocesi_de_Montfroid_PDF.xhtml#_idContainer120 .Sidebar-Single-Column}
[Soft Thrall Sigils]{.CharOverride-5}

[While the ancient sorcerer-scientists who created them could command
them with but a word, each Soft Thrall was also bound to a specific
sigil of control.]{.CharOverride-1}

[These sigils appear as palm-sized clay or stone discs with a beetle
carved into one side and the Soft Thrall's name into the other. They
register a faint magical signature to the appropriate Arts or spells of
detection.]{.CharOverride-1}

[By presenting the sigil clearly, a bearer may command the associated
Soft Thrall. Commanded thralls will obey any non-suicidal orders, though
they cannot leave the dungeon level where they are encountered. Thralls
are too addle-minded to know much beyond the immediate scope of their
duties.]{.CharOverride-1}
:::


{% endcomment %}
